All of the money that goes into this is obviously spent in other
agencies rather than in, uh, the
Center. Uh, everyone in this room is
acutely aware of the horrors and harm caused by family violence and sexual
violence in our country. It includes high-profile tragedies as
well as the tens of thousands of New Zealanders whose names we don't always learn,
who experience violence on a regular basis, usually behind closed
doors. When someone makes the difficult decision to leave a violent relationship
or get help in the aftermath of sexual assault, they need a safe and
appropriate response from trained professionals who understand the complexities of
family violence and sexual violence, and who can work with them to provide support
and make a safety plan. Family and sexual violence are some of the
most entrenched problems we face.
They can't be solved by any one government or government agency, but
we can make traction if we work together.
Uh, Te Orirekura is a 25-year strategy for intergenerational
change, and the executive board is committed to building the necessary
foundations to realize that shared vision.
Uh, during 24-25, the executive board agreed core operating procedures
to try and sharpen up each agency's responsibilities, including
expectations about information sharing.
Uh, the executive board, um, uh, set,
presented new strategic intentions to the House, and they set out where we will
focus our efforts in the medium term, including system stewardship,
evidence-based investment, and better outcomes for people affected by
violence. So, I will, uh, a- almost finish my
opening remarks and hand over to Emma.
I would just, in closing, say family violence and sexual violence are one of the
main drivers of violent crime in New Zealand.
The data shows that a significant percentage of victims have experienced multiple
victimizations. Family violence is a pattern of behavior, and the cycle
is difficult to break entirely. By working together and
sustaining our focus, the executive board can use a variety of levers across a
range of key agencies to improve crisis response, build prevention
system
(coughs) , excuse me, systems
that keep people safer. Emma has delegated
day-to-day operational responsibility for the Center.
Uh, uh, Emma, some of you will have clocked, uh, has just announced that she'll
finish up, uh, with the Center in March, uh, next year.
So, uh, this will probably be her last time in this capacity to p-
present in front of, uh, this committee.
I would just acknowledge the h- the huge amount of effort, uh, and achievement that
Emma has put in and, um, and had over the
last four years, more or less, in this role.
And then I'll pass over to Emma, who will also make a few quick remarks, uh, and
then we can get into the questions, uh, proper.
Thank you, Andrew, and, uh, kia ora koutou.
Um, it is really great to be with you today because it's so important that
we get to discuss, um, well these issues.
Uh, the Center is the operational face and lead of the
coordination, um, and at times wrangling of all of the
agencies, uh, to get on the same page about what's most
important, what's gonna make a difference, and how we align our action and
activity to get there. Um, the Center has been
working quite hard in this last year to deliver our new action
plan, uh, which was launched in December last year.
We've become a lot more focused into three core areas,
uh, of work. One of those is to really understand,
uh, where we are investing, uh, and what that looks like across the
whole portfolio. So we've been able to, for the first time,
visualize all of the money that's going into family violence and sexual
violence in, in a direct capacity, and start to understand
where the gaps are, what that looks like across the country, and what we need to do
as a result of that. And I'm sure there'll be a great opportunity to discuss some
of that. The other big focus has been on,
uh, what we call keeping people safe, which is what is actually happening
on the ground in community. Uh, we, we seek to work in
a multi-agency way here in Wellington, but we have to ensure,
uh, in community, where things are actually closest to
whānau, that those agencies are coming together with the NGOs and
specialists to make a difference.
And so we've been doing a huge amount of work this year to strengthen those
responses. And so again, I know in our agenda, we have a chance to, to go
through a lot of that. The other area of focus for us
has been around stopping violence.
Um, I would say that not enough focus and attention has
been placed to date on the effectiveness, uh,
and getting it right for the users of violence or perpetrators of
harm, and that's, uh, that's the third key area, um, for us, um, this
year. Um, one of the things that we, uh, at the
Center are working, uh, to try and achieve as well is to really
look to set the standards, the capabilities and expectations of our
workforces. Um, and so we've been able to deliver this
year, um, a new risk, uh, safety practice
framework. Um, and next year, um, early in the new year, we'll
be delivering our sexual violence capability frameworks.
And so again, a chance to talk to that.
Um,
the last thing I just wanted to note, um, as well, uh, was just like a,
a really special mention to, uh, the providers, the
workforce, and importantly to acknowledge
victim-survivors, uh, their voices, and the importance of keeping
those central to the work that we do.
Uh, we have continued to partner this year with the Backbone Collective to, to
continue to seek voices, experiences of victim-survivors.
And if I say nothing else today, um, in my time here
in, in my role is to listen to the voices of
those that most matter, um, which is those victim-survivors and their
families, and we will absolutely have the solutions to these challenges.
So thank you very much. Um, and I just acknowledge also my team, um, and
the hard work that they put into this area.
Good.
Thank you.
Right. Now we're gonna turn to the audit, uh, report.
And Mr. Steventon.
Oh, gosh, the audit report.
Yep.
Right.
... got the letter again. Well, I mean, yeah, you've got, you've got three goods
from the Office of the, uh, Auditor General.
I mean is there anything you wanna kind of call out where you think there are areas
for improvement from the audit report
from your perspective?
Well, um, I think-
Mm-hmm.
... it's been a really... I always find these processes really useful for us.
Um, we're ever needing to explain and
understand how we do things better in, in the way that we set up and
operate. Um, I think that couple of the things that
we've managed to do this year is really strengthen our risk framework,
um, and our risk reporting, uh, not only for the center but how that
applies to the delivery of the action plan.
Our success rests on the success of other agencies, uh, being
aligned and making sure that we are, um, have the right capacity
and capability in place to do that.
So, that's certainly been something that we've, um, im- improved upon, I
think, this year. Um,
Andrew and I are often talking about how to continuously evolve and
mature and, um, improve the function, um, and,
uh, performance of the IEB. You'll note in our questions and
answers that we provided you, that we are s- very interested in looking at our
performance measures, and we might get a chance to talk about that as well.
It's been something that has been set around delivery of the action,
stewarding the strategy, and ministerial satisfaction.
Uh, we have our outcome and measurement framework, but getting to the core of the
performance of the IEB is probably something for us to continue to focus
on.
Just one quick follow-up.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, just, uh, could just... I'll just so we're all just on, all on the same page-
Yeah.
Obviously, we've got, we've got the annual report here.
We've got the board as of the 30th of June in here.
Any changes to the board makeup-
Have we got-
... from that?
No, not that.
Not, mm...
No.
So, the board hasn't changed. The board is set in the-
Okay.
... Public Service Act.
Yeah.
What the board has chosen to do this year is to create a
sub-committee.
So, that's one of
my- Yeah.
That was going to be my next question-
Yeah. ... 'cause obviously, we don't have the Police Commissioner here or, um, you know,
the Director-General of Health, et cetera.
So, maybe just briefly for the committee, yeah, how is it then operationalized?
'Cause obviously, you've got, you've got the board and obviously got the chair
here, which is great. But yeah, how then is it operationalized 'cause obviously,
they've got-
Yeah. ... other colleagues.
Yeah. Yeah.
So, I'll talk, I'll talk at a board level.
Mm-hmm.
We, we have, um, the, the board as chief executives.
Yeah.
It does include the Police Commissioner and the like.
The board is meeting, I think, three or four times a year as a full
board, probably three times a year.
Yep.
Uh, w- we've, we have on a more or less a
monthly basis met as a sub-committee of the board.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, which, uh, has been, uh, me and Emma.
It has been the Police Commissioner, the, um, chief executive of Social
Development, Debbie Power, the head of Oranga Tamariki, uh, which has been
Andrew, uh, Bridgeman and-
Corrections.
... uh, Jeremy Lightfoot, uh, from Corrections and the chief executive of the
Social Investment Agency. So, that, that has been the
subgroup. Uh, that's been a subgroup because there's been a particular focus
on, uh, the action plan with they're the main players and particularly
on multi, uh, agency responses, which we'll talk about a little bit
more.
So, we've, we've kind of recognized that there's a...
this i- this is a big and complex thing and-
Yeah.
... health has got a lot and education. They're all still members of the board.
They, they come together, uh, less frequently, but to really
just do their checking in, in, in the s- some of the more f- formal worki- of
a board and do a little bit of scanning.
So, in the new year, we will be having a discussion as a board, uh, I think it was
our full board, which will be looking at the sexual, uh, violence, because, you
know, that's an area where I think that, uh, that hasn't been one of
the, the top priorities in the current action plan that is clearly an, an, an issue
that, that is, that is, you know-
(coughs)
... (coughs) is need of a lot of, uh, work.
So, we will do that at a, at a full board.
Uh, at a subgroup, we are keeping track of, of, uh, the, the
things that we have to be delivering-
Yeah.
... more now. And then-
Mm-hmm. ... there's a dep sec, uh, group which Emma might talk to.
A number of our colleagues behind us-
Yeah.
... uh, would be present as part of that dep secs group which, which is
works in really close support-
Yeah.
... of the board and of the center.
Mm-hmm. That, that's right. So, we convene the deputy secretaries,
um, uh, monthly. And some of that's about making sure what's
coming up to the board, everyone is across and comfortable with and has their
hand on. Um, but some of that too is to take away key pieces of work-
Sure.
... and make it, make it happen.
Yeah.
Um, it is a really good clearinghouse, but also a place to, I think,
continue to push our ambition and our level of change and the things that
we are wanting to push the board on.
So, when we do that collectively, uh, I think we, we get there with more of a
unified voice.
Good, okay.
Okay, I'm going to Karl, yes, Bates, and then I'm gonna come to Miss White.
Thanks, Jim. Just talking about the performance reporting, how far
along that journey of getting them clear, um, are you?
Yeah. So, during the year, we did a piece of work, uh,
in, in conjunction with the deputy chief executives to start to look
at, under all of the functions of the board, how would we translate
those into two things? One was, uh, what does,
uh, better maturity look like against each of those functions?
That's things like our-
Mm-hmm.
... stewardship of the strategy, our alignment on policy, our
outcomes, our stakeholder engagement and trust with the sector 'cause that's
really key. So, we looked at a range of those areas, um, and then
from there, we also created some indicators.
So, we've been doing that work as agencies, um, and then the
next step is to take a refined version of that to the board so that they're
comfortable with that.
And so, when do you think that'll become publicly available?
Um, so we're working on that over the next couple of months.
I think there's a window in the early part of next year, uh, to make
those, to put those forward.
Oh, okay, okay.
I think we would then pilot those measures to make sure that they're the-
Do you have a board level
or are you go- ... right kinds of measures before bringing them into effect sort of next financial
year.
I th-
There's a couple other kind of measurement frameworks as well.
One is obviously the government's target, the target fall which goes to the, uh,
victims of arma-
Yep. ... fening. Within that, we track the-...
uh, family violence and sexual violence, uh, victims.
So we're, we're tracking it there.
And then there's the monitoring and outcomes framework, which is a
publication that we put the first version of that out in, uh, about this
time last year. Uh, it's due to come out every two years.
We're actually gonna do the next one in March to get on a, a March cycle rather
than a December cycle.
Okay.
And so that will give you an overview which will really present the challenge.
Are we making impact at the outcomes level-
Yeah.
... on family violence and sexual violence?
So that'll be the overarching one, and what Emma's describing is being able to be
just sharper on the performance as it relates to the specific things that are
sitting underneath that.
What you're actually doing, isn't it? Yeah.
Right, we're meant to be migrating towards strategic direction, but I've got Ms.
White.
Um, I wanna know about, um, the work with the Social Investment
Agency. Um, new player and, um, you talked about
it at the time of the budget, um, e- at the center was working
on the Social Investment Agency, with the Social Investment
Agency to align the plan and make investments work.
Can you tell me a little bit about that?
But before you do, Emma, it's lovely to see you.
Mm-hmm.
And I am really sorry that you're leaving. Yeah.
Thanks.
Thanks for all the work.
Yeah.
I'm, I might invite Afra Green to join us at the table, um,
uh, for this.
Uh, I'm, I, I might start, lead, lead off with, so Afra deeps, uh,
Sec at the Social Investment Agency.
I might, might kick off, uh, uh, in responding to that just to
recognize the kind of the, at a board level, the, the points of connection.
The Social Investment Agency is the vehicle we're, uh, we're a
new... Basically the, the kind of flagship of the, a new approach thinking about
the government social policy is being carried forward.
It's thinking about how we contract, it's understanding what is investment that is
going in. Uh, it, it really is the place where we
would be able to remove duplication and get much more effective
coordination of services, and understand what impact they would
have. So that is a, that's, that's kind of a, a, a
bit of DNA, uh, that has to be intertwined with what we do in the-
Agreed.
... in, in the, um, family and sexual violence,
uh, space. So that is kind of where it begins.
We've done work, and Emma might want to talk about this a little bit more, in, uh,
that we haven't published, uh, as yet.
But it looks at, uh, all of the expenditure in the family and
sexual violence space. And you are into hundreds of millions of dollars obviously,
and trying to understand that better.
That's, it's work that we've done very much collectively with the Social Investment
Agency as a platform from which we will actually be able to, I think,
bring a much richer analysis. And, and deal with some of the
problems that I know, just from talking to Mr.
White outside, are really prevalent.
That there is duplication, that it's often hard to get things done, that often
agencies on the ground are gonna be tripping over themselves.
There's a lot of the work that Afra might want to talk to the Social Investment
Agency is thinking about in that space as well.
But Emma, do you wanna have a first crack at it?
Yeah, and I think it's been really important that we're very transparent about what
that partnership looks like, 'cause I know some of our sector and providers are
sort of saying, "Well, how does this all work?" And, um,
essentially for the board at the beginning of the year, we're really
cautious, uh, to not race into, uh,
adopting too quickly a social investment approach perhaps where it
didn't, um, where it wasn't going to be effective, or where we needed to really
retain particular ways of operating, or services and
supports that were really fundamental to safety first.
And so we did, we have taken a few months to really understand
that picture, uh, which is really where the baseline review
insights information has come from, uh, to get that really good
picture. Um, where the partnership works well is that
Social Investment Agency are developing the tools and the approaches
around outcome-based contracting, uh, making much sharper
the data leads, um, and insights, um, sort of visible
and, and measurement and, and progress, um, monitoring against
interventions. And so we sort of, our role is to s- is
to steer where, where best practice is, where,
uh, I guess also really to call out the watch-outs and to, you know,
be cautious about certain things.
And then to work together to say, "Well, how can we use the toolset to advance
better outcomes, particularly for key groups, um, uh,
within, uh, you know, family violence and sexual violence?" Um, I know there's been
a lot of focus on children and young people so far-
Mm-hmm.
... um, in terms of those new investments, and that's really critical to our, our
outcomes as well. Yeah. Um, uh,
I think, um, A- Andrew and Emma have had, covered quite a lot.
Um, the, the core areas for the Social Investment
Agency obviously are in creating the tools and frameworks,
uh, for other agencies to use. And, um, that's what we've done particularly in
looking across the investment, uh, in, in relation to family and sexual
violence. And then, uh, with the Social Investment Fund,
um,
the cohorts that we, um, have, the Social Investment
Fund ministers have selected, we take a deliberate view of
what is the long term-
Line.
... investment, um, picture for those cohorts and, and how
are they impacted, um, in a range of ways.
Yeah.
Sorry.
Now that, we'll move on. Uh, did you want Social Investment?
Actually yeah, I'm happy to leave the audit stuff and just, I've got two
supplementaries on this if that's okay.
Oh, on Social Investment?
Yeah.
And then I'll come back.
We'll take that and then we're gonna come back.
Yeah. Yeah, good.
Okay.
I'm sure we'll
be along- Just for the new members, I want to complete lines of
questioning, then we come back to a new topic.
So Social Investment.
Fantastic. Thank you all for being here.
Uh, the annual report notes that the center has been focused on social
investment, and we know there's been that work done with, um, in
partnership with the Social Investment Agency.
And priority one of the second action plan is
investing and commissioning well.
And the phase one review of past spending is now
complete, so what lessons were learned in this review?
And can we expect to see any new or different commissioning or budgeting in
the future as a result of this?
Mm-hmm. Yeah, so that first phase review is done
between, um, both our agencies, and it was one of the first sort of cabs off
the rank to start to say, "How might we apply some of the social
investment outcome sort of, uh, toolset-"
Mm-hmm.
"... to our area?" So I just wanna note, it was a desktop
exercise. It wasn't going out and deeply evaluating each
of those services.
Right.
Um, but what that helped us to see, um, is always
more work to be done, uh, to understand effectiveness.
Uh, but we can start to see that there are certainly programs and
services with a clear theory of change, um, a clear line of sight
for who those services are for, and the kinds of outcomes that are being intended.
Mm-hmm.
Um, things like, uh, child advocates and women's
refuge-
Mm-hmm.
... were demonstrated to be, you know, well,
well-positioned, ensuring that we had stopping violence services for
boys and men, um, and, uh, a range of other sort
of areas that needed to be supported.
Multi-agency responses, as an example, was, were shown to
be effective, um, in parts, and we'll no doubt will talk a bit
about that. Um, and then there was some other areas that were
identified that, um, it wasn't because they were failing, it was just
there was not enough evidence at this stage-
Mm-hmm.
... to tell us, um, that. And so, I think what we've
learned, um, one of the big things is, is that you can't
just look at the dollars. You have to look at effectiveness-
Mm-hmm.
... at the same time. We are probably less strong,
um, in, uh, available data on effectiveness than we would like to be,
and we need to continue to, to build that.
Um, we've kicked off an evaluation, for example-
(coughs) ... into multi-agency responses-
Mm-hmm.
... on the ground to start to bring those voices through to understand how
effective they are. So, we, we have taken some of that and, and brought it
through.
Thank you. Uh, so can the sector be sure that no reductions
in service provisions will occur as part of the
reviews? And what provisions has the Center made to ensure that the
providers are being kept informed?
Mm-hmm. Yeah,
yeah. As you said, trust is so important about, um,
the intentions and approach so that we don't have a similar
situation to the Oranga Tamariki contracting disaster.
Yeah. Um,
so two, two questions there. One is that, um, our
role is to make visible, uh, where the
spending is, to give guidance and advice to the board about where
best to, um, prioritize and give effect to
best value for their funding.
Mm-hmm.
Um, the individual contracting decisions still remain with the individual
agencies-
(coughs)
... uh, and so I think that's probably a continuing point of,
uh, discussion and tension at times.
Um, then secondly-
Just, just before we move on to the second one, one of the things I would note is
we, we were chased around a bit by this committee last year,
because, uh, of decisions. There was debate on some of the
decisions police had taken, debate on some of the decisions Oranga Tamariki was,
was taking. And the, the question was, "What are you doing about it?" In the
Center-
Yeah.
And, and so this is a little bit of this tension that, um, Emma is alluding to.
I don't have, neither does Emma, decision rights over what all of the individual
agencies are doing. We have agreed and quite formally agreed
as a board a set of protocols about making sure that,
uh, each CE and each agency, uh, has an obligation to
inform the Center so that we can be much better placed,
uh, to understand what those impacts are.
But y- we won't be able to give you a, an undertaking from here-
Mm-hmm.
... that there won't be any changes to other agencies' contractings that might
have an impact on, on services. Our job will be to make sure
we are better sited on those when they come in and understand the implications
of it.
(inaudible)
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
All right. We're coming back -
Sorry?
Did you want me to answer the second part?
Okay.
(laughs)
Thank you.
Yes. That's what we're doing, social investment.
Um, so, uh, one of the primary ways...
So we, we have a number of networks and communication channels that we do
communicate through. One thing that we've done with our...
We have a systems working group. There are about 50 to 60 people that we convene
monthly to bring together, um, from all facets of the sector.
Um, we've run some joint sessions between SIA and the
Center about exactly that, lifting the veil.
What's the, um, the partnership, how we're working, and what can they expect to
see?
Yeah.
So appreciate early on, it was probably a little bit misty, um, for
people and now we are, um, as I say, working much more...
A- as I think each of us has got more clear about those roles we are
communicating there.
Okay. Dylan?
All right. Um, I just wanna ask about, um,
the new, um... Like, you had the little
subcommittees, and they met, and they talked about how there was gonna be a
commitment to sharing information.
And, um, that seemed to me an interesting...
I'm, I'm taking your points about your role advocating to
ministers, but sharing information seems
quite passive in some ways. It's not
saying,
"Tell us when you think there's harm going to be done."
Yeah, so the protocols that the...
that we've set out for the board, uh, have a range of things.
And one of those is not just to inform but to consult and demonstrate
implications and impact. So, um, if, if a
decision is being taken, particularly around contracting resourcing,
it might be in terms of function of an agency's role when it comes to family
violence or sexual violence, that actually that's needing to come with, uh, an
impact sort of, um, assessment done against that as
well.
I love the idea of multi-agency, things like this, but let's take a
couple of real examples. One is the police withdrawal
from, um, family harm incidents....
and that, can you tell me how that would work with this?
And another would be the issue of, of
a ban on homelessness. Two examples that are very
current that may well impact on the levels of
violence
that are taking place.
I might answer it in a general way, and then I'll get Tasha to talk specifically to
the, uh, police one. Uh, in a general way,
the, the, the board sub-committee is meeting right
alongside the social sector chief executives, and so there is a clearing
house of opportunity to talk about, uh, are there, are there new things
presenting, new issues arising that, that we should collectively
be, uh, concerned about. If the, if there is
a, a, a decision taken on
homelessness, that you wouldn't necessarily expect that to immediately
come, uh, before the board. You, you, you'd want to...
Uh, we would, to be honest, would want to see what a, what the specific
implications of it would be, that the center might get in, uh,
consulted on some of the cabinet papers that were going up and would be able to put
a perspective in there, as would other agencies.
But it would be, it would be through that sort of standard, uh,
process. But I wonder, Tasha, do you want to talk about the police?
Because that's, that was an issue last year, I'm sure it's an issue now, but yeah,
in terms of-
Mm. ... police engagement.
I'd be in real trouble if I didn't ask you.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, yeah, no, kia ora, everyone.
Um, uh, and thanks for the opportunity.
I think, um, language is really important, so withdrawal isn't the right language.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so when we, um, adopted the RISS Calm
Attendance Framework, we actually did a pilot, as you probably know, in September
'24, and then it was rolled out in December '24.
So like a lot of change, you need to be really confident and clear on why you are
doing it. And, you know, the reality is, we have to
ensure... Family harm is a significant issue across Aotearoa, and
has been for a long, long time, which is why we've, uh, done
things like ISR. And we've really challenged ourselves in the multi-agency
space, and to your point, of absolutely sharing information.
So the reality is, in the, in the, with high demand and volume, you just have
to make sure that every agency is doing an appropriate first
risk assessment, and then appropriate service to what's
required. So if we are talking about the RH, HA, I
really do, uh... You know, it is, it is not a withdrawal,
and my evidence of that is that we have an additional
7.7% of family harm which we have said are
P1. So P1 is the highest response and
prioritization then you can, that you can get from a triple one
call. It actually means that it i- there is no bigger
priority. You have to have available calls and you must attend.
So again, since we've made this change, it's seven point
cent- seven percent, um, increase.
What we assure everyone, though, is that we don't just
leave, uh, calls for service. We, uh,
prioritize them, we triage them, we push them back into the
districts-
Mm.
... and then we look at, what is the appropriate thing to do?
And a large percentage of those will actually go to multi-agency
tables, where they can have a very big look at, uh, the whole
family and everyone's information that they know.
Okay.
Uh, just clarification.
Mm-hmm.
Since this re-prioritization, I think you said that
your responses to Priority One family
violence incidents has gone up seven
percent. Does that suggest to you that
not attending lower level
incidents results in more Priority One
very dangerous incidents?
No, no, it doesn't mean that at all.
Wh- why not? What's the ca- what's the cause and effect there?
Yeah. And Dr. Webb, I love that you are interested in this, um, because
of course in your area, we have ISR, and I know you've been and had a look at that,
at how effective it is. So no, I wasn't saying that at all.
What I was saying is, when we're doing a P1 and we're getting their, the
information, uh, we will, we will make sure that we attend
wherever there's a breach around the criminal justice proceeding, around
PSO or any warrants. We're looking for harm.
If we, there is any indication at all that there is harm to any persons
or property, we will absolutely attend.
So why is there a seven percent increase in those kind of most
serious incident?
Well, uh, we'd have to say, and we have done an initial evaluation, we'd have
to say that, uh, because we've also enhanced the training of the
call takers, and we've really challenged ourselves on making sure that we're
asking the right questions at that time and seeking the right
information, that actually we are in a far better position from the
risk assessment framework to really ascertain quite
quickly, both looking at the past history but looking at what's being
presented at the moment, to actually decipher if there is
immediate risk or a immediate breach of any criminal justice proceedings and
we must attend. So we are viewing it as actually good
cholesterol to make sure that those who need us in that moment, that
we are doing a P1.
So you're saying that you, you're attending more...
There are more P1 incidents because you're better at detecting Priority One
incidents?
We would say that that is definitely a factor, because I mean, it's no different if
we look at the agency and what one of the key priority is around training the
frontline services and workforces.
This would be a natural, uh, thing that we would expect.
The
more we- Uh, but so you can assure us- Yeah.
Oh sorry, if I can just finish?
No, that's
okay. The more we train and the more we ensure that people are understanding the
nature of family harm, which again has been a significant e- uh, factor
for a long time, this is what we would hope to see.
So...
Last one.
The, uh... Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for that indulgence.
So notwithstanding the fact that there are seven percent more Priority One
incidents, you're saying that this is because you pick them up better and
not because there are more dangerous incidents occurring?That
seems to be counterintuitive.
No, it, it could be possibly an and-and. I'm not gonna discount that.
But what I will say is whenever we have seen a focus on
training and specialization in a risk matrix, we are
better at then applying a graduated response model and
ensuring appropriate service, opposed to every single
call we get for family harm, we have to attend when we've got a significant
demand for service.
Okay. So, we've done the police call-out to family harm events.
I wanna move on, or have you got one more on it?
I just got, got something where I wanna try and zoom out and look at it in terms
of this agency. In a situation which is very
controversial, like this,
how does, um, this agency respond, this
center respond, to, uh, the need
to actually assess all of the impacts of something
like... and I don't wanna use the word collapse, you'll hate me for it,
but-
I won't hate
you. (laughs) ... something like this change in policy by
the police,
in terms of the, the multiple impacts of it.
For example, one of the things that really worries me about it-
Mm-hmm.
... is police aren't there to pick up the risk to children in
this situation. And there may not be any other
agency picking up that information in domestic violence
situations where a child is
Yeah.
So can you tell me, how does this center
then deal with the fact that it's got that
kind of new policy?
Mm-hmm.
Okay. Good q- good question.
(clears throat) So there are a couple of things that we did earlier on-
Right.
... when we understood that police were really looking at their
framework, and also, you know, wanting to...
So, so largely around the country-
Right.
... police have stepped in where no one else has-
I didn't read
that. Oh. ... to orchestrate and lead multi-agency responses-
(clears throat)
... which has seen police both be the first
responder, and the coordinator, and the administrator, and,
and, and. And so, the center, um, in terms of its
more proactive stance, um, uh, at least a year
ago sort of wrote to the Board and said, "As part of our work into
multi-agency responses, we also have to understand the role of
police," importantly, "and how we start to design for a future where
we adopt, um-"
(clears throat)
"... frameworks and adop- adopt, um, different ways of practice, but
start to design that into the new model." Ideally, police perform
their role, um, a- as, as they should in their lane, and then
others can pick up other parts, um, of that response.
Um, I've written to police to say, um, "You need to
bring this to the Board." The Board, you know, there are discussions at Board,
um- The Board's, Board's had several conversations about it with-
... about this, um-
... with both the previous and the current Police Commissioner, where they've
explained
their approach to it and-
Mm-hmm.
... r- r- range of reassurances about what is happening and what isn't happening.
Right.
Yeah.
Does, does anyone collect... Does...
Is there any, um, oversight of those
consequences afterwards?
We're not measuring anything specifically, um, as a result
of... uh, you know, looking, we're not sort of assurance over police.
Um, we are certainly, as I say, looking at the effectiveness of
multi-agency responses, which are not all of the police
call-outs, um, will be going to those tables, but we're certainly looking
at the evaluation and monitoring of some of those results and
building better frameworks to understand what's happening.
You can a- appreciate around the country right now, it's very diverse
in the way that some of those responses are, are happening.
I have to- Can I, can I, um, come in here as well- Yes. ... if that's okay?
So firstly, um, you know, every single day
with our, uh, staff that are going out, and you're right, going in
possibly more homes than any other agency, without a doubt
our absolute focus is on the welfare of children
and identification of any children that could be at harm or at
risk. Um, you know, I've been around 34 years and, and to be quite frank, it hasn't
changed. Um, here today, we have 7,500
investigations, uh, for child protection.
So that's here today. Uh, when we do change, you are quite
right, we have to be really considered, we have to think about the other agencies,
and there is al- always an impact of change that we have to be acutely
aware of.
Right.
And that is the reason why, uh, we, uh,
currently, uh, are reviewing, uh, the risk
framework, and we're challenging ourselves to ensure that we are
actually focused on getting all the information we can on children.
Um, we've also just agreed... uh, the commissioner has put in place a senior
oversight group, uh, for family harm, for ASA, and child
protection, and which I chair, and we are looking across the
board to make sure that we're challenging our training, our
frameworks, basically everything we are doing on quality assurance.
So, I'm certainly not gonna sit here and say we are perfect, but what I will
say is we are actively challenging ourselves to ensure that
we don't drop the ball. So-
Okay. So first of all, I just wanna say, I respect the work that
police do-
Mm-hmm.
... and I have good relationships in my own area with
police, and I know how hard some of these situations are.
But we have a situation in this country-
Mm-hmm.
... where children die far too regularly.
And these are situations where police are no longer.
So in fact, this is, this is Dr. Webb's point,
that in fact, by not turning up, there may be an
escalation in this situation. But my point is I'm
worried that we won't know about these things until we see them in
our homicide statistics.
Mm-hmm.
So it's a serious issue for everyone, and I totally
appreciate, it's really hard.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Yeah. And, and, and just on that, sorry, if you don't mind,
you're quite happy to tell me to be quiet, if you wanted to.
(laughs)
Um, so, uh, look, I, I think I love these things 'cause we...
I, I often find we're just in absolute violent agreement (laughs) on the same
issue. Mm-hmm. Um, but I, I do wanna make a point....
the response that we do around the framework is but one thing, so
it's not just left there. Um, you know, these- this
information goes out to districts where they're assessed.
If there is a d- determination that we should then respond, it goes to
multi-agency tables. When we put all the information
together, we get a far broader picture because this is episodic.
It's not an incident, so that's the first thing.
One incident doesn't actually tell you the whole picture that's happening in a
whanau. That is the imperative importance of the work we've been doing for years
around ISR, around Whangaia nga Pakeke, about working with the
agencies to get the episodic total picture.
So, um, you know, yes, the response is one part, but our work
together to establish what is actually happening, and then have a plan around
it, which is why I think we've got
29,017, um, or 13,000
family safety plans is so important, but anyway.
Okay.
That's enough from me.
Right, I'm going to go to Rima Nakai, and then we're going to go to a new topic.
Yep, so this is supplemental. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um, from- from what we were just touching on right now, our babies, our
children being killed.
Mm-hmm.
Um, far too often, and it's one- it's a very big black stain of our-
of our country. How frustrating is it for you,
um, Deputy Commissioner, in your role as a police person, and
our agencies, that
almost all the time, in most of the situations, we're met
with adults that were in the household that refuse
to speak? How frustrating is that in
terms of, one, addressing what happened, and
two, making sure- trying to stop it from
happening again?
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, so
firstly, your field promoted me, I'm acting, not the actual deal.
Um, but-
Because-
It's not- it's not frustrating, it's actually heartbreaking.
It is heartbreaking. And from investigating these
files and being there, one child is one too many in this
country. One child is one too many in any country or any area.
So, uh, you know, this is why we have to have a movement.
This is why, to your point, yes, adults know and sometimes agencies
know, and, uh, we've been on this journey for so long.
And, you know, that's why, um, I will confidently say the work that we've been
doing over years around this multi-agency space is- is the only answer.
We have to have campaigns. We have to have people feeling confident to pick up a
phone and tell someone, because what we know is child abuse is
silent. Child abuse lives in silence. We- we all have a role to play.
So yeah, I- I wouldn't say frustrating, but I'd say absolutely heartbreaking,
and we just gotta keep going. We gotta keep going and not
politicize any of this. We gotta keep going with the work that we have to do,
yep.
Well, I- I've got a pill to attract.
(laughs)
I've got a new question. No, I'm gonna go back here, uh, for a new line of
questioning-
Yeah, and I've got a new question.
... then I've got there. Oh, I'm third, then.
(laughs)
It's- it's a free line of questioning-
Third-
third is lucky. ... but I have picked a question so that there is a joiner.
Um, and that is the issue of the strategy
not having in it a child, a separate
strategy around children, which is something, uh, that I
wonder whether we should be looking at, because we have,
uh, I can see that to have the strategy overarching is good, but there's
nothing here that focuses specifically on
children, and I just don't see why not, given
how different some of the issues are for children, but also how they
would feed into each other.
Maybe- maybe from a broad point of view, I mean, the children, to be honest, are at
the heart of all of this, so I mean, the- the
children, uh, impact on children runs right across,
uh, the board. It's- it's in all of the actions, it's in all of the things that we
are doing.
Can I just-
So it's- it's- it is-
Yeah, can I comment? This is not something that I've magicked up.
Mm-hmm.
This is being reported back by some of the big
providers for- for issues around women's violence.
They are saying that the children's part of the strategy is
a bit lost.
Okay, so
yeah.
So, um, in the action plan, so that's the one from- from
this year to 2030, we've got seven focus areas, and one of
those is children and young people.
Um, at the moment, it's one of the focus areas where we say agency
is taking action. Now, that's not to say that it doesn't become
a- a- a future dedicated and, you know, fair
focus.
Yeah.
Under the keeping people safe area, so that's sort of the multi-agency
responses that we've just been kind of talking about, there are a couple of things
there. One is we have identified the
critical components or, uh, conditions, uh, locally
that must be true in order to create a safe, multi-agency
response, and one of those is that they are victim survivor and child
centric, and we, uh, currently have a specific, uh, work stream
of work happening to look at the package around children,
to both make them visible and ensure they are protected within the
multi-agency response. The board is about to
agree. Uh...
(laughs)
Um, I'm getting them while I can.
Um, is about to agree-
You can promise anything now. (laughs)
Is about to agree our high risk protocol-
Yeah.
... um, which is a protocol that all multi-agency responses will need to
adopt, uh, which centers, uh, and has specific,
uh, capabilities, process, risk around children.
Uh, it's something that we're looking to first off bring into the multi-agency
response. The other piece of intersecting strategy is the
child use, uh, strategy, which has clearly one
key area around reducing harm to children from a- a early
intervention and prevention perspective.
We absolutely need to do more to bring all of this together in the Dangkar and
Petasi recommendations, absolutely center around
for chil- for child safety. We're leaning into that, uh,
particularly around the workforce training, um, and also there is clearly
a piece around the multi-agency in joining up with Oranga Tamariki,
and so Darren and his team in their enabling communities work.
So-
It's just not-
Yeah.
... clearly
put together, and I think what you're saying is we need to see that visible so we
know what we're, we're aiming for.
Okay. And, um, and as you point out, it's on your list at number
four, and the three that we're focusing on, other three,
but it doesn't mean the others aren't happening at some level when I-
A- absolutely not.
...
Absolutely. It's very hard. Yeah.
There's a huge amount of effort going into those others.
But the, how do we wanna strengthen the action plan is that said let's actually not
try and do everything all at once. Look, where we've got inter-agency
effort that, that ha- we have to bring to bear, we will, we will
focus that which is why it is a focus area.
Okay. I'm going to Ms. Carter.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Really keen to, um, follow
on from, um, your comment around what you would expect to
be consulted on. Uh, so as part of the
coordination and accountability function, the IEB has formalized the
requirement that it be consulted by member agencies on any
decisions which could disrupt the family violence and sexual
violence system. So, what does this
consultation system look like and how is
disruption to this system defined?
Because you talked about housing, that you might not,
um, be expected to consult on that, but of course, housing
is a huge predictor of family violence.
Um, and obviously things like the
budget cuts, um, to Oranga Tamariki and cutting up the safety and
prevention, um, organizations. So, what would you
expect to be consulted on?
The- there'd be two levels of consultation.
I'll get Emma to talk to it as well. At, at a high level, this is the sort
of consultation that you would do between departments when there's a policy change
coming.
So if a, a cabinet paper is circulating on
homelessness or, or, uh, alcohol laws or whatever it
is, there would be consultation across agencies and, and, uh, the
center would get consulted in that as with the Ministry of Justice, uh,
and, and others. We have put in place a specific set of protocols.
If one of the agencies that's part of the joint venture is about to
do something that will have a, a, a kind of a material and, and
sort of direct impact on the work that they are doing in the family
violence and sexual violence space.
So, that's absolutely when police is changing their practice
around, uh, how they triage, uh, incidents.
You would expect that when, uh, we've, we've had correspondence, uh,
with the ACC where they're changing some of the funding decisions that they're
making. We would expect them to bring that to us, and have an opportunity for us,
uh, which would happen through Emma's team, to go back and discuss it, uh, with
them. And, and so that has been a mechanism that's been working.
Did you add anything?
Mm-hmm. Yeah, I mean, it's, people are getting more into the
practice of, of doing that, and operationally, yeah, it's
coming through to us and, and/or CEs are writing to CEs-
Yeah.
... to give that advice. There are times when Andrew has had to write to
CEs-
Yeah.
... to say, "Hey."
"What's going on?"
"This is a surprise."
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. So I ha- just have three more supplementaries on this.
So, for example, worsening costs,
um, of living pressures have been cited as a reason for increased
needs for family violence services. It's well-known.
Would the center expect to be consulted on decisions that may result
in creating the circumstances in which the violence is more
likely? For example, benefit sanctions, um,
or
you're just talking about directly related to the sector?
A- at a, at a high level, yes, there would be a, if there was a
benefit sanctions thing or something like, I suspect that cabinet paper would,
would come to the center much as it would come to the Ministry of Justice-
Mm-hmm.
... much as it would go to the Ministry of Education and, and whomever.
And agencies would choose whether they were gonna provide any comment into
that. That's kind of-
Mm-hmm.
... just a regular part of the policy-making process.
An issue like that wouldn't trigger the sort of protocol that we've been
talking about. If there was, if MSD was aware of some changes to the
benefits space, I wouldn't ex- I would expect it was the Secretary for Justice
to be consulted, but I wouldn't expect to get a specific
notification as a, as the board, uh, of
the, um, uh, the IEB for that.
Thank you. That's, um, giving it a bit more of a clearer picture.
So, because it, this
arrangement has been formalized now, so there's like structures in place.
So, what happens when agencies make a
decision, um, that do cause disruption to the
family violence and sexual violence system, um,
even after consultation had been, uh, has informed
them of this outcome. Like, what is the next step after that?
So, you know, for example, with this, um, inquiry
here, there's, um,
been safety care agencies
lose their funding. What, like, follow-up steps...
If, if this was in place when this happened, what follow-up steps could you
make, um, if they went against, um-
Yeah.
... your recommendations? 'Cause recommendations and advice
Well, and that's, that's the nature of this structure, is,
I, I, as chair-
Mm-hmm.
... and, uh, uh, Emma as chief executive, or even us as a
board, don't have the decision rights that apply within the different,
uh, agencies. So, if they raised it, we, there would be
some discussion that would happen betw- between Emma's team and the team from
the agency.
If there were concerns there, it would get escalated to the, at least to the chief
executive level. There might be a discussion at the chief executive level.
There would probably be, and in the police case, we did have discussions at a board
level where police talked about what they were doing and the sorts of things they
were putting in place to make sure that, that this change in practice
wouldn't have a negative outcome, uh, on, on family, uh,
violence.
Mm-hmm.
If someone was choosing to, uh, uh, close down
some contracts, uh, you would expect that to be brought, and,
uh...I, my expectation of that chief executive, uh, would be
that they would then take the concerns that we had into
account. It could get escalated to the ministerial level as well.
The key thing is that the mechanism will bring transparency to it.
Mm-hmm.
And then, to be honest, we still would rely on the-
Yeah. ... the orthodox approaches to decision-making, so it would
still be a decision that would be taken by Cabinet, or- or by-
Mm-hmm.
... the responsible minister. And I think that's, you know, this
is, there's- there's-
Mm-hmm.
... well north of $700 million worth of, um, expenditure goes into
family violence, sexual violence space.
Emma doesn't have any direct levers to control that.
She can identify where it is, she can understand some of the shifts that might be
occurring, and- and make sure that that's part of the discussion.
Mm-hmm.
But it still will come down to the people who are the- the- the vote
ministers, who are charged with account- they'll be where the accountability lies-
Oh.
... for that expenditure.
Thank you. My last supplementary on this.
Uh, so do you think that,
um, the IAB needs to look at being able to go further, to
have that teeth, and do you think that that was the intention when it was set up,
to be able to have a bit more than just consulting, um,
advice?
No-
Was it being able to hold, um, these agencies to
account for the longevity, doesn't matter which government the
government of the day was, that there was really enduring,
um, focus on prevention of family and sexual violence?
So...
No, I'm- I'm sure it was never the intent that-
that- (laughs) ... there'd be a veto power or that the actual levers of control of this would be
held in the IAB, and the Cabinet paper will bear that out.
It's still- it's still an entity designed to, uh,
to bring transparency, to make sure issues are fronted so that a
conversation can happen. Uh, the net result of that conversation
may still be a reduction in a program or- or whatever it is,
but- but it will be a decision taken after it's gone through this
process.
I've got one clarification here from-
Yeah, just-
... Ms.
White. ... a clarification about the role of the minister in this.
So if you have something like we had, we've had the
issue over, um, OT and its contracting and
the loss of, uh, money to some of the services like the North
Shore Women's Center, et cetera, and there was
scathing criticism from our
various bodies, the- the Children's Commissioner, et cetera, and
then a- a scathing Auditor-General's report, what
role, when something like that happens, what role does
this group have in informing the minister about
the dangers of what has just occurred
in terms of-
Okay.
... family...
The- the- the- the- the kind of key call we'll start with-
Mm-hmm.
... who's actually got the decision rights.
Yeah.
So in the- in the police example, it's actually the decision rights are with the
Police, uh, Commissioner.
Mm-hmm.
So certainly we would be keeping the minister for the, uh, prevention of family
violence and sexual violence informed.
She, you know, we may have a conversation with her about whether she should be
writing to the responsible minister, whomever that, uh, happens to
be, and she might-
Happened to be her.
... then do that.
(laughs)
Beg your pardon?
It happened to be her.
Well, I mean, in the case of Oranga Tamariki, uh, it was, and so,
you know, and- and you know-
Got it.
... I did, I know you've already had a good conversation with- uh, with Oranga
Tamariki around- around a lot of- a lot of those
issues. We didn't have the current protocols in place, uh, now when some of
those decisions were taken.
And that was one of the, one of the reasons-
... getting each other known. Yeah, got you. ... that has prompted us to have them.
But you'd still have a ce- I mean, it'd be entirely possible.
So what would happen, you know, there have been discussions.
I've, you know, we do a modest amount of funding, uh, in the Ministry
of Justice. If we were going to, uh, discontinue some of that funding, I would
let the- the board know. They would- they would
ask me questions like, "Well, jeez, why?" And, "What have you done?" And, "Are you
sure that..." You know, and I would explain myself.
Uh, if there was a lot of concern around it, I mean, I'm sure Emma would take it
upon herself to inform the minister, "You know, Justice is doing this.
These are their reasons. There could be a bit of fallout from it if that's what the
center thinks." So that would happen and then the minister would have the
choice of engaging with- with another min- minister and
They could advocate strongly.
Beg your pardon?
They could advocate at their level.
They could, they could. Yeah.
Uh, I sense you want to say something.
I better join the meeting for Oranga Tamariki and respond to some of those
questions. So although we had our day on Tuesday, we'll have another
go today. Oh, yeah. I think we need to.
So just a quick part on there, before decisions were made-
Mm-hmm.
... around contracting and funding-
... the paper did go to Cabinet. So Cabinet decisions were kind of
presented to Cabinet prior to any decisions that Oranga
Tamariki made around contract changes.
The focus was on utilization of contracts.
A clear statement was made by the minister and direction that
funding around utilization had to be priority, focusing on
core work and business that's going to meet the needs of children, but no
funding in family violence could be moved away from family
violence. So any changes to contracts that were not being
fully utilized or we did not think were meeting the needs of children
may have been adjusted, but overall the total amount of
money in the family violence for Oranga Tamariki remained
intact.
All right, thank you for that clarification. Now I'm going to Mr. Stevenson.
We've got about 15 minutes left on strategic direction, risk, safety
and practice framework. Hopefully somewhere.
Uh, well, kind of. I was gonna, well, yes, do my
best. Um, thank
you. Just talk about those words.
Thank you for coming to the table, and again, I don't think we should shy away from
actually... Now, 'cause I want to get on to results and outcomes, and again-
Mm-hmm.
... there's a lot of, um, conjecture about why different changes were made.
But I think in- in the case we've just been talking about, it's actually to try and
deliver better results and outcomes.
So-
Mm-hmm.
... I just want to move on to that topic. And in fact, in response to Mr.
Bates before, you talked about, um, the fact that you're working out some new
performance measures and outcomes, et cetera.
Um-Has any thought been given, because again,
um, obviously, y- you know, we've got, this is a cross-agency, um,
effort, but has any thought been given to actually embedding
whatever those become, and you said we'll get to see them shortly, hopefully before
you leave. I don't know, but that's, anyway, uh, what-
Do you
want to start? ... thought has been given to actually trying to embed some of those in each of the
individual-
... um, agencies and departments you're working with because we a- that's what's
actually needed to get a collaborative cross-government effort.
We actually need, you know, justice and police and
OT to actually be at least working on one of two of these
shared things together.
Mm-hmm.
Um, r- yeah, so-
Mm-hmm. L- look, I think that's a really good advancement.
Um, accountability, uh, if nothing else, has got
to be, I think, the wha- Engineering accountability at every layer of the
system for this has got to be key, right the way down to the front
line. Um, at this stage, uh, the, i-
in terms of the work around performance measures, those would be things that the
board would adopt, um, and then we could look at how those
were, um, perhaps given effect to through individual
agencies or CE performance. Um, certainly Andrew
has KPIs around his role in the board.
There, there's no reason why you couldn't start to look at other ways of doing
that. And certainly, s- s- true with my colleagues and as the DCEs.
Um, the outcome and measurement framework is also the
way in which the board is held to account, uh, for progress.
Now appreciating that measurement framework is, uh, measuring
the, uh, strategy and it is long term.
Um, and so looking to highlight different measures within each
agency would be key. Getting that strategic alignment between
the strategic intention of the organization and family violence is gonna
be really key-
Okay.
... to, to seeing that.
Just another plug. Um, uh, the Financial and Expenditure Select
Committee is actually looking at cross-government at performance measures.
Yeah.
And so again, I don't know if you've had any input to that, but I would-
Yes. ... welcome that because-
Mm-hmm.
... there are only a few, your board being one of them, there aren't
so many, um, cross-department boards
like this, and we actually need to see more of this because one of our...
I'm just now gonna make a huge statement, but one of the issues we've got in
government is there are actually too many individual departments working on
individual goals that aren't well connected, so-
Yeah.
... yeah.
Well, I, I think that's right. And, and, but it, but it's not a
panacea, I would say. You know, so for something like this group, it's
actually hard work doing this stuff-
Oh, I totally accept that.
... across the agencies, and it comes with a bit of cost.
Yeah.
And it comes with a bit of bureaucracy, you know, and sometimes you feel you're
sort of, you're railing a little bit, uh, against that.
But the, but the benefit of it is if you have something like the monitoring and
outcomes framework, it's a, it can give you a sense th- something to navigate
by, you know. It can create the space where you have the conversation, "What are
the things that we're really gonna put the effort into and, and do?"
Within that, you then have a conversation about, "Where are we putting our focus
now?" The strategy Te Uru Rākura is a really good overall guide.
The action plan has set out the things to focus on, on the, in the
specific term. But we've particularly said as a board, let's spend
our coin on the things where working together on something will make a
difference. So one of the really, I think, impressive things that's happened
through the board is the work around training, you know, the, the,
the center did work with the sector on what the right kind of training
capability framework was. We've now, we've now trained over 10,000
staff, uh, in, in how they recognize and respond
to family violence. The risk work that we've already done and that is underway
now is another way. If you have all different agencies
assessing risk in a similar way and triaging, you're going to get
much more effective working together.
I think, I think understanding the overall spend which is the stuff
we talked about when Aphra was at the table- Mm-hmm. ...
as well, gives you an opportunity to ask the question, "Are we really getting
value for money out of these hundreds of millions of dollars that we're
spending here? Is there duplication, and can we take it out?" You can do that
much better if you're having a conversation with all the CEs around the table-
Mm.
... at the same time. So I, I think in terms of getting to the key performance
spaces, as a board, you've got the big outcomes framework.
You've then got to be really clear about what are the areas where we think it's
worth our while to be working collectively.
And then you do monitor against those areas where you've got a collective purpose
and a collective action.
Okay. We will get to performance per- reporting-
(laughs)
... but we're gonna have one last-
One more question in the very-
... question around f- uh, strategic direction.
I just wanna know have there been any other emerging issues and
trends that you've seen in the last year, um,
and ways that you think government can combat those?
Mm. Mm. I mean, I think when we talked last time
as well, I probably raised online harm as a-
Yeah.
... one of those areas which not only is, uh,
emerging, it's accelerating, and, um, it is an issue that the
board is interested to understand more about from the center's
perspective. And so we do have some work that we're just doing a bit of scoping to
understand what, if anything, uh, what role we might play, um,
there. Um, obviously, again, not holding all the legislative levers that
we, we don't have that, but certainly as a board, you know, looking for some fresh
advice there. Um, I think it's, it's
absolutely, uh, right and we understand, um, as other members
have, um, identified is that when you, um,
experiencing, uh,
more hardship, uh, you know, complicating factors within
whanau, more complexity, uh, I think it's safe to
say that, that that complexity and picture of violence is getting,
um, more challenging. Um-
I don't think, also my final thing is I don't think we give enough rise
to all forms of violence. And so, we get quite focused on physical
violence and absolutely at the very pointy end of the triangle, we
should. But that exists within a, within a, a, a
much broader suite of, uh, collision and control and manipulation and
power dynamics which are just as or
more, um, disabling for people,
um, than necessarily physical violence.
And so, um, I think part of our challenge is trying to
give rise to all of that complexity, um, and in...
and I would say that that's, that's here and now, that it's not sort of coming at
us in the future.
Thank you.
Okay. Now we're going to go to Ms. Carter, hopefully about Performance
Measurement.
(laughs)
I would love to talk to you about, um, performance in terms
of trust within the sector. And we've already, um,
alluded to this, um, before. Did you see how I used the word
performance in there?
Yeah, very good. Well done.
(laughs)
I'll give you a big check. (laughs)
So,
I want to talk about the genuine partnership with Tangata Whenua.
How does the center, formally known as Te Puna Ao Nui,
um, and we know that that name was, um,
stripped from the ministerial...
by the ministerial advisory group who gave it, um, to the
center because they felt like that name was not being upheld under
the current minister. How do you see the
current relationship with Tangata Whenua Partners following that
wrap-up of Te Pu Kotahitanga and their
reclaiming of that name, Te Au- Te Puna Ao
Nui?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Um,
we have, within the center, um, some key
capability, um, uh,
dedicated for Maori-Crown relationships and
ensuring enduring partnerships for change.
So, we have a team within the center,
um, I have a Kaihotu director of Maori
outcomes, um, and community
partnerships. What we have, uh,
continued to do, so it's a kind of two-fold, two things.
One is, we have continued to, um,
implement some of the initiatives from Te Pu Kotahitanga.
So, um, under, under that, um, advisory board, um, a
number of initiatives were started and we've continued those on.
Uh, one of those is the Toiora Framework which is an outcomes
framework, um, uh, and we continue to, uh,
work in partnership to create, uh, tools and accessibility for
that framework for frontline providers, community, um, and
groups. Um, we're continuing to do some work to
map the online harm ecosystem for Maori, um, in
working, uh, to do that. Um, the other key
area that we're focusing on is through our multi-agency
work. It works best when iwi and community
lead. Um, and so we have, uh, partnerships now,
um, with Ngati Kahungunu, um, in the Hawke's Bay, uh, to look
at implementing our new ways of operating around
multi-agency, um, and similarly in, uh, Tairāwhiti with
Manaaki Tairāwhiti which is under one of the runanga there.
Um,
we also have, uh, work happening in the far north, um, with
the... there's a police partnership with Te Hiku which is called Whiria Te Muka,
um, which is a partnership to, um, respond to family violence.
We've done something a little bit different in that we have a role within our
center who is, uh, funded by us but is part-time with
them and part-time with us, and so we're starting to,
um... so sometimes in these partnerships, you say, "Well, what are you bringing to
the table?" And, um, at times, it is putea, absolutely, but at
times it needs to be capability and, and ways of working.
And so that's one of the approaches that we've taken, um, in that.
So, for me, it's been about pointing our, um, those
relationships, uh, not just at a s- at a relational level,
that's important, but actually in an implementation on the ground, um, space
as well.
Fantastic. One supplementary question.
Thank you. Thank you. So, how much did it cost to disband
Te Pu Kotahitanga and rebrand as the center?
We did a PWQ that said it didn't cost anything,
but, um,
I just wanted to put that question to you because it didn't compute in my head when
rebranding, I know that that does cost money.
Yeah. Yeah. So, we, um, were really clear at that time
to not, um, look to incur cost, um, around
that. A couple of things we had to do was to lodge a domain
name, um, we now, um, prevent
FVSV. Um, we actually already had a domain
name, um, of that from previous iterations and so we didn't have to
incur cost there. Um, there will be time, um,
into the future where we might want to create, um, you know,
banners and, you know, pull-ups and those sorts of things when we're out and about.
We have chosen just to pause, um, once we've got our new name, um,
getting used to all of that, um, we've updated our signature blocks and,
um, we've updated our website, but we've done that all through our baseline
funding.
All right. So, we're going to, back to Ms. Clark, uh, Ms. Bright, sorry.
Hello. Hello, Nondi. Um, I want to know, um,
you've got, um, the outcomes and measurement
framework, and that is supposed to show tangible effects
of the work.
Um, but the website
doesn't have any tracking, and it
hasn't since the 9th of, um, sorry,
since the...
Yes, the 9th of December 2024. We just checked again.
What's going on there?
Yeah, so we've been reporting quarterly to
ministers. Um, we haven't put those quarterly
reports up on our website.
Okay.
What we're... I've just signed off on, just this week, is a sort of a
wrap-up report of the year, uh, to demonstrate progress against
milestones, what's been achieved, what hasn't been achieved.
Um, although there's
nothing there that hasn't been achieved.
Um, and sort of a bit of a wrap-up of the year.
Um, so that will be communicated-
Perfect answer.
... next week. Yeah.
Right. Next one.
Um, the annual report states that it will continue to
monitor delivery of the action plan via quarterly reporting
milestones.
Those are what you're talking about?
Yeah. So we provide monthly to the board and the DCEs, and then
we turn that into a quarterly to ministers, which goes to our minister, and then
she sends it across to her colleagues.
And do we get to see it?
Well, you've raised a really good point, and I don't see why not. So we would...
We could absolutely look to introduce more frequent reporting, um, in terms
of some
Can you maybe just, uh, come back to us and confirm whether this is going to be
covered?
Yeah, sure. Yeah, yeah.
We would love to. That would be extremely useful.
Yeah.
Um, in terms of our big stats-
You've got that?
Sorry, is that... Okay.
Yeah.
In terms of our big stats, like our homicides
and our levels of violence, do you think we're
measuring sufficiently? And are you measuring
against those big stats, given we have just... In...
We've just had the WHO report come through.
It's horrendous in terms of New Zealand's violence
rates. Are we doing that big-picture
measuring?
Maybe, maybe I could kick off in the first instance-
Yeah.
'Cause the, the, the best source for that information, the most reliable
information of all of the offending is actually the, uh, Crime and Victim Survey
that we do. And so we are obviously putting that information up, publishing it,
um, quarterly, uh, and, and doing deep-dive analyses on
it. That does give us a sense of the violence that
are occurring, both reported and unreported, because of the
methodology-
Yes.
... that is used for that. So that... I...
To be honest, I think that's something of a, of a gold standard in this space
because it, uh, it's comprehensive, uh, coverage.
You then also have reporting, obviously, about what police does and what goes
through the courts.
So you're happy with the, the measure that we've got there.
Yeah.
Are we measuring against it and are we going up or down?
Uh, well, we've been tracking, um, in terms of
the, the c- the core measure. It's, it's part of that Target
Four.
Okay. Uh, and that, like the rest of Target Four, went up and it has, uh,
come down, uh, to, I think, a bit lower than when it was.
Do you have those numbers?
I was going to grab some, yeah.
Uh, but yes, the short answer is we are absolutely tracking against that, and
we're, we're, we're tracking and observing how that is moving.
Okay.
And it's... So it's part of that good overall positive trend that is
coming down, though, though I think that, to be honest, the family violence numbers
have, have come down less, less steeply than some of the other
offending that's-
This is a detailed-
Have you got the numbers, Emma?
Um, I, I can tell you that, uh, in terms of, uh,
adults, uh, victims of family violence, it's about, it's about
2.3% of all adults. Um, and that has generally
remained, uh,
stubbornly the same.
Static for a long time.
Um, we are seeing, though, in terms of the quarterly results under
Target Four, there is movement in those numbers, and it is coming down
slightly. I can grab you that stat and we can-
We'll see
how- ... perhaps send you that, that table-
That would be good, just like that.
... just to answer that.
Can I ask a detailed question on this?
Um, with regard to sexual violence-
Mm.
... we've also seen, um, uh... An- and this is
really just people I'm talking to, a, a huge
movement in the area of rough sex.
Mm-hmm.
And, um, one of the issues that I've got is that people
will... They're not... A- according to people I talk to-
Yeah.
... they are not presenting to our, um,
rape clinics. They are presenting to A&E because they do not consider
what's happened to them as sexual assault.
And we have a whole lot of people blurry on what sexual
assault is. How does that interplay with
the, um, actual picking up of the-
Mm.
... trend and, and, and the issues out there?
Yeah. Um,
I know in terms of the Crime and Victim Survey, whilst I'm not sure if it goes
down to that level of specificity, it does name
the, uh, examples of what might have happened to you. Because it's...
Often people will say, "No, no, that didn't happen to me." And then when you tell
them the... You know, "Well, did any of these particular things happen?" They say,
"Yes, yes, yes." And so people are not equating, uh,
what's happened to them with actual sexual assault, um, or rape.
Um, you're absolutely right in that the norms around, uh,
sexual, um, uh, connection are
changing, uh, particularly for young people.
And one of the things that we are focused on is ensuring that the
workforce can pick up. Um, so for example, in those
EDs, um, uh, you know, do we understand those signs and
do we understand where we might make a warm referral to the right kinds of
services and agencies, um, as well?
It certainly is an area of focus. Um, and as I say,
early next year we'll be publishing the Sexual Violence Capability Frameworks,
which will start to identify what people should be looking for, um,
in, in understanding that. So I think it's a really important topic to
raise because it is changing the norms, um, that we're seeing.
I guess, um, one of the interests I ha- have here are the comments
from, um, Ange Jury about education-
Yeah.
... being an absolute priority. Um, and
particularly in this area, where I'm not sure
people even know how dangerous some of the things that are
going on are.
A- absolutely. In terms of rough sex, choking, and strangulation,
um, there is really good evidence to show just the, not only
in a family violence context that strangulation is a key indicator for
le- for future lethal- lethality, but in terms of, uh,
rough sex and strangulation and choking, um, that is becoming more
and more common practice, but has severe, can have absolutely severe
consequences in terms of health outcomes, brain injury, um,
PTSD, a whole, whole host of things.
So, what we can do is help to s- to shine a light on
those, um, pieces of research and information, and think about in
terms of education and training, particularly for young people, you know, what
are the harms and, and issues there.
Right, thank you.
I, I, I could give you the, some of those numbers that we were just-
Yeah, that'd be great.
... talking about just before. Uh, so when we started off with the Target Four
targets, the, uh, the, the number that was the sort of the
beginning baseline was, was 76,000 for unique victims of sexual
assault. Uh, they got worse initially up to about 88,000,
and has now come down to 74,983, just under
75,000. So it's, it's come down from where we began,
uh, but only a little bit. In family violence, the number at the beginning,
October '23 was 44,599. That's now
dropped to 40,622. But the point
worth acknowledging for this committee and the sobering stat
is that because the other numbers have come down further, the
proportion of the violent, uh, victims of violence that are
victims of sexual assault has actually increased.
So it's still, uh, the absolute number is lower, but it used to be 41% of victims,
now it's 51%. Uh, and for family violence, at the beginning it
was 24%, it's now 28%. So the absolute number is
coming down, but we've made more progress in other areas than we have
in the sexual violence and the family violence space.
Right. We're gonna have one more question on performance, and then we're going over
here.
And I'm gonna wrap two that are about numbers together.
So, you've received no new funding in the budget for
2024. How, um, is that, um,
challenging what you can do? And then, I wanna know
specifically about Project Whetu, because I
understand that you said that does require additional funding.
Okay, let's have those two.
Uh, on the, on the first one, the center itself didn't receive
new funds last year. They were a lot, along with most other, uh,
agencies, to be honest. Um,
uh, the bigger, broader picture of what's happening in the funding
of sexual violence and family violence goes to all of the different
programs that have been undertaken in, in different areas.
And that gets you, I actually don't have the numbers of, of how that has shifted-
Is that north of $700 million?
... from one year to the next. But overall, uh, you're talking much, much bigger
numbers. And the, part of the work that we're doing and the investment analysis and
working with the Social Investment Agency is very deliberately trying to
identify where is the most effective, uh, spend
across that area.
Okay, so the Whetu-
Mm-hmm. And so the second bit, we haven't done the second bit.
Uh-
Project Whetu, how much will it, will you need?
Have you put a business case to Cabinet?
So, there's been something of a journey on, uh, Whetu.
Uh, what has really, uh, Whetu's got a couple of elements to it.
It's got a, it's, it's, at, at its heart is actually what's the operating
model that we need to do to do multi-agency response in place.
So, so what is the, uh, what do we need in terms of making sure
that, uh, all of the different agencies, including some non-government agencies,
are bringing, uh, information that's relevant to harm to
those, to those tables, those responses, and working out where it plays?
A big part of Whetu is coming up with that, uh, operating
model. Alongside that, we've been asking ourselves, what's the technology
solution and what is the opportunity to, uh, roll out a, a
technology, uh, solution? Where we're at now, uh,
on both of them is, is in a position where we're most likely
to take more of a prototyping approach.
So, so we won't be seeking in the, in the coming budget,
uh, the funding for the, a full-blown technology solution
across the country. We'll be looking to prototype, uh, this different way of
working, uh, in, uh, in, in
locations and, and understanding what the information needs are
of that as we carry it forward. Did you have anything for that, Emily?
Uh, no, I think that's absolutely right. We've, um...
What, what we are doing, uh, into the new year is taking the
non-technology improvements though to, uh, two key
sites, Hawke's Bay and, uh, Tairāwhiti, so that we can start to
implement and test what that looks like.
Um, pa- part of the, uh, impetus, and I think it's a really
good one, is that we should be re-leveraging existing technology
rather than buying and building something, um, standalone and new.
Um, and that's something, again, for agencies to work through.
I suspect you want to say something.
Can you guess what it is (laughs) ? No, um, I just came up
because I was sitting there going, "Shall I come up?" And I, I was breaking out in
hives, so I decided to come to-
(laughs)
... the table, um, because the rough sex conversation.
Because you're right. You know, we have, uh, women
and men and young people who, who
question whether they've even been sexually assaulted.
And, you know, it's consensual or it's
not consensual. It doesn't matter how rough it is, to a
point. And, uh, so I think that's a really
important point. And we have generations.
It's n- not just young people. You know, we have so many, we've got
5,700 active investigations at the moment, and we
know that is not the totality of the reporting.
So, the point you raise is very, very valid,
and that's why we have to have multiple points of entry
to our systems, many of those through NGOs and other
groups, so people can actually ring and ask
without judgment around, "This is what's happened to
me. Um, can I talk it through?" So, sorry, but I,
I did literally break out in hives and I'm-
Don't go again.
Just say, just say that.
I think you make a really good point around consent, right?
And I guess my question is, um-And feel free to just
say it's too, you know, if you're able to answer.
But do you think there's a- a- a some kind of mismatch between
the way the law and the way we frame consent in our law and the
way we expect it to operate? Is that something that needs
work?
Uh, I- I just think this has been an issue for a long time.
Um, look, at the moment, I- I believe the legislation
is pretty sound around it. It's just the interpretation of it.
I mean, literally, you know, people sit there, victims sit
there, and- and they are actually asking you, you know, "Did I do
this?" Or, "I'm not sure," or, "This happened." And people actually don't
know the threshold of when it becomes, you know, "I-
I- I don't, I didn't want this, but this has happened." And so all
I'm saying is, we need multiple
avenues for people to be able to come, to have really safe
conversations, at any age, about, "This is
actually what happened to me," and talk it through, and then just establish what
pathway they go down. And so yeah, I- I apologize, but just-
Yeah,
that's good. ... when we're talking around sex, I think we need to be really clear on what we're
talking
All right.
Thank you.
Now we're going to move... Thank you for coming, by the way.
Okay.
Now we're going to move on to Miss Carter.
Thank you.
We've got the last bit about multi-agency collaboration and service
gaps.
(laughs)
Yeah. Thank you so much. So, I want to talk about,
um-
Multi-agency.
Yeah, multi-agency, absolutely.
Well, I do want to talk about, um, some of ACC's
funding. Uh, how has the centre been monitoring
progress relating to sexual violence?
While it's not the priority area, of course, I know you're still
very, um, focused on it, noting that the sector has
long called for greater dedicated focus and resource to ensure
ongoing buy-in and continued funding.
And I've got two supplementaries.
Okay.
Thank you.
Yeah, so there is continued work in the sexual violence,
um, space. And one of the things that has happened, uh, more
recently is the joining up through the Safe2Talk, um,
portal between... So that's funded and run, uh, through,
uh, MSD. And then we have the ACC Sensitive Claims
Pathway, which provides a alternative, uh, place for
people to go, get 24/7 advice, counseling, support over the
phone, but also creates that pathway into ACC if that's
something that they choose to take up.
So that's one of the things that's been happening, um, this year, sort of, you
know, under the agencies taking action.
Um, you know, there have absolutely been, um, a number of reports just
recently shining, uh, a really important spotlight into sexual
violence. And it is something that the centre, um, uh,
earlier, uh, in the- in the sort of last quarter has picked up a piece of
work to, um,
to look at sexual violence prevention and bring some
specific advice to the board, um, on that.
In September, I brought to the board a bit of a, "Hey, you need to look at
two key things," and one of those was sexual violence and one of those was online
harm, and the intersection between those two things.
Um, as Andrew says, you know, 50% of all those, of
victims, um, are- are sexual assault victims under violent
crime. So that is, that is key for us.
Um, uh, I would envisage that,
uh, into next year, a series of more concerted actions will
be designed and developed and taken forward.
The other thing that the centre is doing is we have a, um, a partnership
with Taur Nest, uh, which is obviously the, um, peak body for sexual violence
specialist services. And we've been working with them on this idea
of, um, understanding what are the barriers are, um, within the
system, but also for victim survivors, um, and then through the
centre, starting to validate those and work out solutions for
them. Uh, we continue to work with Taur Nest on the, um,
development of the- the sexual violence capability framework.
So there is, there are things that we are doing to push on, uh, the
sexual violence issue. Um, but as I say, I think
post sort of early next year, we'll start to see some more, um,
uh, refreshed actions.
Okay.
Thank you. I've just got two, um, questions here.
So Hikatea For Our Future, ACC's sexual violence prevention
fellowship, had its roll-out discontinued-
Mm-hmm.
... because of ACC funding pressures.
We know
of providers who were reliant on this funding expansion
continuing so that they could continue the work in the
regions, y- they were, they were relying on this.
Was the centre consulted about this decision?
And is the centre certain that the 11 of
the 16 regions without this funding have
adequate sexual violence prevention programs and altered
alternate- alternative funding available to plug
this gap?
Mm-mm, mm-mm. So in terms of Hikatea, um,
my understanding is that, um, after the first
five, uh, locations and providers, they were looking to
evaluate and understand what the impact was before rolling out
further.
Mm-hmm.
So that was sort of part of the decision-making.
Um, the centre, uh, understood that they were
thinking about that, um, and- and then, um,
learned that those decisions had in fact been made.
And so that was one of the really good examples where the board was,
um, uh,
perhaps not notified, um, early enough, but at the same time,
um, there was discussions had and- and understanding of- of some of that rationale.
So- so that was there. I have met with, uh, some of the
Hikatea providers, and it looks like a really great, um,
undertaking. Um, it is something, though, that will take some
time to really un-, to- to, um, particularly as you
are working with networks and bringing l- local community
together, determining what is going to work best in that community and then
taking that forward. I think that the- the timeframe, I think it's a
three-year timeframe that they are working to in those contracts, that is really
important that that time gets taken.Um, I would say
that, um, I'm not aware of other new funding that might be available for other
communities for sexual violence prevention.
Mm-hmm.
Um, but certainly, um,
uh, I'm very interested to see how that community mobilization
approach through He Katia, you know, where that evaluation comes and how we might,
you know, support future roll-out, um-
Yeah. ... when that time comes.
Thank you. Um, my last supplementary here, is
MSD's 1.7 million Safe, Strong Families
funded... funding was ended for its 14 sexual
violence recovery or treatment services.
And the Minister for Social Development has confirmed this
was not for dup- duplication reasons or
under-delivery reasons. Was the center consulted
about these decisions and its rationale?
Um, and is the center concerned that the removal of this funding will
hinder progress on addressing sexual violence, just like
the rough sex example that, um, we've been speaking about?
Yeah, so, um, about this time last year, uh, the board
got some advice about, uh, what funding,
uh, agencies were thinking about perhaps reprioritizing or
considering. Um, one of those was the, the
services that you talk about and Mark from MSD is here, so he could probably-
Oh, this is your moment.
... if, if you want to talk
more specifically. (laughs) (laughs) You waited all this time.
Um-
(laughs)
(laughs) (laughs) (laughs) Have a, have a glass of water.
(laughs) All right.
No, we're gonna get you a glass.
(laughs) Of course.
Um-
(clears throat)
And so in that, uh, i- and, and the advice at that point was that
the-
Thanks, Mark.
... um, looking to reprioritize toward prevention, um-
Yes.
... and that, uh, contracts would be extended to cover a period of
time, uh, to allow for some of that decision-making.
But that decision-making ultimately rests with MSD and their minister,
um, on that. Yeah.
Thank you.
Okay. Do you want to... This is your moment.
Yeah. Um, just, just sort of some historical stuff around,
uh, it's, um-
(clears throat)
... funding that's been around for a very long time.
So, it had no sort of, um, deliberate
investment plan or, um,
really had any service guidelines about what that funding was
about. So, we wanted to reprioritize that into
something that was actually going to
make some difference to the, to the sector.
Um, so what we've, we've just been consulting with
Tauanese, the (clears throat) the peak body, about what,
um, that repri- reprioritization could look like.
And we're just working through some of the options that we've been working with
them on. And we'll soon
try to make a decision about where we rep- reprioritize the action...
funding.
So, uh, these 14 sexual violence recovery
treatment centers didn't have these, uh,
KPIs, uh, there.
Yes.
Um, so but they were reaching their goals
of, um,
the performance and delivery reason...
delivery that they were contracted to do,
but they, um,
you deemed them ef- ineffective before stopping the funding
or-
No, just-
... is that a retrospective thing?
(laughs)
I just am really concerned about there being a gap now because-
Okay, no let's hear the answer.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah, so we're just looking at how, uh, between, you know, the
reprioritization, um, so they, they come
to the end of, um, December about what we can do
once we work out what, um, we can reprioritize those to.
Yeah, but I think the question's slightly different, Matt.
You keep talking about reprioritization.
I think you were asking about
effectiveness and I think we were getting at that aspect.
So- (clears throat)
... you haven't reprioritized-
No, there was nothing... There was no...
Like most services that we have have, uh, service guidelines, we're really clear
what the outcomes we are... want to achieve for those.
Those services didn't have any of that.
So, uh, there was a natural end to those contracts.
So, we thought we needed to make sure that the... they had, um...
they were invested into something that was more
specific, was going to have some outcomes.
So
we-
So is it likely that some of those will be rolled over but with more clearer
service levels-
Yeah, probably into, uh-
Is that
likely? ... something more per- specific.
So, Tauanese are very keen in putting things into
preventative work that they, that they do out in
communities. So, that's...
Okay. Right, I'm going to Mr. Buckle because he hasn't had a, a chance to ask
a question.
Thank you. So, you, uh, you did touch on, uh, earlier about this,
uh, 10,000, uh, staff, I think, or like, like
providing that, um, training, specialist training.
And that training will be probably through OT, the
corrections staff, police staff.
Where, where are you at with that? Because uh, it's an
ambitious goal to have that done by January
27, because my... mine, that's 13 months
away. Um, so
one, where are you at? And do you have enough people on the ground
to actually give that training? So, um, how's that all
progressing?
Do you want to take that?
So, um, yes, it turns out we've trained a lot of people
already, um, just not in the exact timeframe that we've set ourselves.
So, to this point, um, about
10,800 frontline staff in those
agencies have, in fact, been trained.
Um, to be really clear, um-We are helping to
support that training. We are not doing all of that training ourselves.
Each of the individual agencies do their own training.
What we have done, have taken their training and mapped it to our
frameworks-
Mm-hmm.
... to say let's uplift the quality of that and drive, and make sure that
it's happening
at the right level. And so how do you keep, how, how do you manage to get that consistency?
You, you're sitting-
Yeah. So, it's been a significant-
...
frame? ... amount of work to, to look at their training, to work alongside them and their
learning development teams, and to map, literally map all
of the modules and the things that they are doing back to our, uh, capability
frameworks. We've also identified through our frameworks run
from essential skills all the way up to expert skills.
And so not every worker needs the expert skills.
So we've been able to help them to map the different roles in their agency to
the right level of training that they might need, and so they have been,
uh, rolling that through. Um, yeah, the
10,000, um, by Jan '27, um,
ambitious, important to keep that really focused for
agencies. Uh, what we're doing at the moment is just gathering
from agencies exactly what their forecasts are for that time
period, um, but also looking at MSD and
also through health to say, um, beyond the statutory,
uh, agencies that we've talked about, who are some of the other agencies with
actually really key frontline workforces-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, that we wanna do this for as well? So we don't wanna just limit ourselves.
Um, and it's just about being adaptive with-
Well, can you, can you-
... the plan. ... give me a bit of a feel for, um, how long it takes someone to
train to the level that y- you require?
Like, is it, uh, three months, six months? Or what, what, what's actually involved?
Yeah, so it depends really. Different trainings are offered in different
ways. C- Sometimes they can be in-person training, um, or online.
I know for the police it's a pretty significant, um, set of training.
I don't know if you've ever been to the college out there and seen the domestic
violence training that, that occurs.
It's pretty, um, real world and, um, very, very
good. Um, and so d- depending on, uh,
what's, what your role is, say, in corrections, it might be more intense and,
and long than say for another role somewhere else.
It can range from a-
Oh, 1 day, yeah.
... few hours, to a day, to a week, um, in terms of that.
Um-
Fantastic.
... again, as I say, trying to match role to
intensity, um, and, and capability is, is really important.
Right. But then I'll go, I'll get one last one
(laughs) Yeah, cool.
(laughs)
Um, so, so what does it look like once someone gets to the level?
Do they... Is it a certificate? What, what, what is it? What, what...
Is that something that they hold onto?
Um, how, how do you-
Yeah, this is-
What, what's the achievement standard?
Um, I mean certainly-
Go ahead. ... within each agency, they will have recognition of that
training. From our perspective, it probably is one of the future areas
for us to really consider is would we start to
credential, um, those, uh, um,
the training qualification or capability.
Um, just taking us back to the risk safety practice framework-
(laughs)
... um, uh, we have been working with Toitū Te Whaiora
on a- actual qualifications and microcredentials to
support the frameworks. Um, and those are sitting with NZQA right now for
evaluation. So, um, we are starting to venture
into making this more, um, you know, robust in
terms of, uh, uh, something that people can really show, show for their
efforts.
All right. We've got a couple of quick sups on training, and then we're going to
randoms.
Thank you. I've just got a few up on my list (laughs)
. (laughs)
Oh, more to
go. Thank you.
Random.
Um-
So we've seen an increase-
We are almost there.
... in training for police-
Mm-hmm.
... in line with the changes in the call outs-
(speaks Maori)
... uh, for example, but we are also seeing an
increase in need for family violence services.
So, like the 30% increase for Waiariki Women's
Refuge and the 58% increase for Shine in
Auckland, is the center seeing any particular pressure
points in the workforce? And is further work needed to
ensure there is adequate capacity in the
right places?
Mm, mm, mm, mm, mm. Yeah. Um, couple of things.
Um, one is we are doing a annual workforce pulse
survey. So we are asking-
Great.
... um, going out to the sector and asking about-
(coughs)
... uh, capacity, capability. Um, you know, "Have you been
trained in the last 6, 12, 18 months?" Um, where some of those
challenges are, so we'll be reporting on the next wave of that soon.
Um, we've got that survey back in. Um, when we've gone
around the country, particularly, and as I say, we've been under that umbrella
looking at multi-agency responses, but you do start to really
uncover at a local level how things are operating and where
some of those gaps and pressure points are.
Um, and so we, we've been able to understand some of
that. Um, where I think we are, we have some
capability gaps, um, is certainly around systematic
use of risk assessment and risk capability, which is where I
think these tools are, you know, this is a beginning and it's, it's helpful to
have, um, and start to roll that through.
Um,
this won't necessarily make, um, complete line of sight sense, but
having really good governance, um, and leadership
locally to convene and ensure that dedicated focus on
performance around family violence is actually really, really key, um, to, to
part of this as well. And so making sure there's capacity, um, and
capability around local governance and leadership around how things are
working. Um,
and
w- there are continuing, uh, challenges in capacities.
And I know it sort of was on our list to talk about and, um, weave it in here a
little bit is just those really vulnerable populations.
Mm-hmm.
And so we know for disabled people, um, particularly women,
uh, rainbow community, um, Pacifica ethnic communities, and for, uh,
Wahine Maori in particular, um, that, uh......
you know, violence is, um, manifest in- can manifest in
different ways, but also requires quite a specialist and different
response. And, and that will be another key gap and area of
pressure.
All right. Thank you. Now, have we got-
I just ha-
...
I just had one more, Mr. Chair. I did ask for two supplementaries.
No, we're going to go into randoms after this.
Oh,
okay. Let's finish this.
Still catch it. And this is, this is a master of random and that
anyway.
Which one
do you want to know about? Because I want to know about-
Go
ahead. ... the sexual violence courts, which were, I understood
it, an area where there was training given, quite a lot of training
given to, uh, judges, but also
registrars on the impact of delay.
My eye was concerned to hear that they had
stopped those sexual violence courts even though they've been made
permanent. I have asked and I've been assured they're still
around. Is this the kind of thing where
the Department of Justice would, and the courts would come
to this new center and say,
"This is what's up"?
Well, why don't we find out whether it is up?
Yeah. Uh, no, we still have the, the sexual violence, uh, courts.
And if we were to change them, uh, that would be a judicially led
decision because they are judicially led initiative though-
And no decision has been made?
But, look, uh, as far as I'm aware that we still have them.
And that's an example of good training-
Yeah.
... I understand.
Great. Question one, done.
Okay.
I've got two more randoms.
Right. We're moving into randoms, so get ready.
(laughs)
Okay. You can have two-
... and then you back here, and then we're going...
Then I'll go to Rima after this.
Okay.
Let's go, Helen.
Throw the papers away, right?
Yeah. (laughs)
Next random is housing.
Anyone wanna come to the front desk?
Women in housing.
(laughing)
Random answers.
I went, I went to the Women's Shelters Conference, and one of the things that
shocked me was the turn-away data with
regard, it was actually, it was Canadian research which said
that 70% of the women that are turned away from re- women's
refuges are, are women without children,
and that most of the women turned away from women's refuges never
come back. They go back to violent relationships, never
reappear. Can you tell me, is there any work being done
in the area of housing for single
women? And
you want me to stop?
No, no.
Or stop?
No, we'll stop on that. Do, do you want to come back to this one?
Yes, I think that would be wise. I'm not sure...
Um, I would need to perhaps talk to our own refuge networks to
understand, um, what they're experiencing at that front
door, um, and also in terms of, um, additional housing.
I know that there has been work, um,
between, uh, agencies looking at, uh, the needs and
prioritization of women who are leaving violent relationships,
um, and that, that is something that perhaps we could provide more than an answer.
My, my feedback from the near 40 women from New Zealand at the
conference, I think? Yeah. And my feedback was, "Yes, that's true.
They turn away single women because they have to
prioritize women-" Prioritizing, yeah. "... with children." Makes sense.
They're a much longer waiting list than all kinds of people in other places."
What's your, what's your ne- what's your next one?
Second one is trafficking. We have got new
changes in the area of trafficking.
I'm thrilled to see them. Can you tell me, um, how you're
incorporating that into your work and what part you have to play and what you think
of it? Yeah. So, um, talked about this last year at
CEDAW as well, um, just in terms of, of, uh,
trafficking. And I think, you know, importantly, uh,
making sure that, A, it's been recognized as
that, um, regionally and domestically, um, but then
also making sure that we are tracking and monitoring the s- the statistics through
that. The center does not have, uh, currently a piece
of work that we're doing to focus on trafficking, um, but it is
part of the broader sphere, um, you know, in, in understanding, um,
those issues. Um, yeah, as I say, in terms of our
prioritization, it's, uh, unfortunately-
Okay.
... it's not one that we have live right now.
Right. We're going to Ms. Gnarligh.
Uh, um, when we spoke this, um, annual views last year,
um, Emma, it was very clear that, um, that
everything was quite nebulous in terms of,
um, in terms of how we're going to, uh, unpick everything
and, and find that, that common ground going forward.
But today, I see that, you know, you've, you've got quite a, um, a
good command of, of the gaps and of the links and things like
that. It's a shame that we're seeing you go.
Um,
in, in, in terms of that difference from then and now, uh, what would
you say are the biggest, um, are the biggest
things that you've, you've taken out of-
Yeah, yeah.
... from, from back then and this is now?
Yeah.
Absolutely.
I, I think one of the... It's a, it's a blessing and a challenge
because when you pick a couple of things to focus
on, and you have to say, "We're not picking up that other one, and we're not doing
this other thing right now," it's a really hard line to walk
because everything is urgent and important.
Um, and I, I, I don't say that lightly because I fully believe
those things. So, it is a really hard thing to just prioritize and, and
pick a couple of things. I think where we've been able to get significant
traction is getting out of Wellington and
getting more out into the regions and partnering.
As I say, we've gone to 12 regions this year to develop our
system improvement plans for those locations, particularly
around multi-agency, um, and how they're operating, and
come to work with them on, uh, what is working, what isn't working,
and what needs to happen to take action. Very practical.
Um, and we have also, I think, got clearer about our
role in doing the design, the setting the standards, creating the
tools, and then looking to implement, um, as, as we
go. I, I really think that having, um, the
subgroup of the board-... on speed dial, you know,
and every month to help make quick decisions and keep
the- the wheels moving and keep that pressure on has actually also been really
helpful.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Okay, last question.
Thank you so much. Um, I just want to say thank you so much for all the work that
you've done. Um, you know, my colleagues at the CE board, our- our friends there-
Yes. (laughs) (overlapping dialogue)
... speak often, they speak often about us singing that
waiata in New Geneva.
Yeah.
They were like, "Wow."
And it comes up over and over in our briefs.
Yeah.
Um,
but yes, thank you so much for the care and your
smarts and that eagle eye view that you have of the whole
system. It has been so wonderful. Um, so I just wanted to
ask, are you coming to the end of your tender, the tenure?
Is that right? Or is, uh, have you decided to resign?
And is, is that in part due to, uh, to the leadership of
the current minister?
Um-
You can ask whatever-
No, you can ask, it's Parliament, you can ask whatever question you like.
(laughs) Am I answering that? No. Yes.
Um-
Well, look, I, I, don't-
Or am I being told about any future results of your co-leadership?
No, no, no, no.
No, no, no, no, stop it. You-
We asked the same
question. You have, feel free to answer that whatever way you choose.
Yeah, that's a fair response. Well done, Nick.
I wanted to just be clear. For me as a CE, I'm not on a
term, uh, so it's, it's evergreen.
Um, my, uh, I've, I've been in the role now for four
years. Um, I came to do a thing. I feel like, and based on some of the
comments today, I feel like I've done the thing.
Um, I also feel like, you know, and Andrew and I often talk
about this is a bit of a tour of duty, it's not a long, long thing
that you do. I'm look, I'm really, really proud of the things that we've
done. But also, um, looking, you know, there's always a freshness and
an evolution that can come. Um, and I'm, I'm hopeful
for another chapter that, um, is the next calling for me, um, as
well. Always in the system, always trying to push against broken
systems that need healing, um, but perhaps just from a different vantage
point.
All right.
Can I, can I just say something there?
'Cause it's an opportunity just to acknowledge Emma as well.
I've recruited a couple of times, uh, into this role.
And one of the comments that I make, uh, to the candidate when they're looking like
they're the successful candidate is that I think this is, this is one of the
hardest chief executive roles in government.
E- and I absolutely hold to that. I think Emma has, uh, has
kind of staunchly soldiered through the last four years with a huge amount of
achievement, wrangling the system.
Mm-hmm.
But it's really hard. The subject matter is hard.
It's hard because you don't have direct levers of control, uh, yet there's a
lot of expectation around delivering it.
So, I think focusing on the things that you, we should be doing at the collective
level with the connections that have become very evident just in the answers Emma's
been given today about how well-grounded she is in the
sector, it's a huge credit to her, and we'll, we will,
we will miss her enormously. But, but I would never hold someone to longer
than the four years, say, that she has spent in this job.
It's, it's just a really, uh, I think it's one of the toughest gigs in
town.
Thank you very much.
So, I'm gonna thank you on behalf of the committee. First of all, to you, Mr.
Kipper-Wight, you've been in the chair for five hours.
(laughs)
Uh, that's sterling effort.
It's about being parched.
You deserve a drink.
Emma, I just want to say on behalf of the committee, thank you very much for,
uh, being here today, but also for your long service.
We wish you the best. We are going to, I'm gonna change the,
uh, meeting slightly 'cause I'm conscious you've got Mr.
White in the back there. What I'm gonna do, uh, hopefully,
Lindsay, if you don't mind, is that okay?
I'm going to-
Hang out with us a bit
Just do that now, uh, before we move into private session.
All right. Do you mind if we just allow Mr.
White to come to the table? And we'll hear his
petition.
And then we're hearing it simultaneously as well.
Yeah, I realize that. Yeah. So if you just, rather than you leave the room and go
back and forth, right, Billy O, we'll, we'll just do this.
You're o- okay, Mr. White? You're, you're prepared, I take it?
I'm ready. Whatever you want.
Cool. Right. Now, we've got, um, 10 minutes with you from
memory.
That's good. Do you want a glass of water?
No, I've got plenty here. (laughs)
You sure? Okay.
Yeah, I'll have a quick sip.
Right.
I feel sorry for you because now you've got to do a complete mind flip
as to what I'm going to say to what you've been listening to.
Simply because I'm talking about
prevention.
Okay?
Yes, please.
Okay. I was awarded my medal
for my work on the prevention of family
violence, and I wear it today to honor
all those lives lost
and the joy for those that I got out in
time. I would much prefer to be at
home enjoying my daughter's company than being
here with a medal and no daughter.
So let's make these minutes count for something.
Let me quote Bishop Desmond Tutu,
"At some point in our lives, we have to stop pulling people out of the
river. We have to go upstream and find out why
they are falling in." And that is the nub of
prevention. It is the safety net on the banks of
the river. It is not the ambulances at the bottom of the
cliff, because prevention has failed totally if
all you do is pick up the casualties.
Surely we can all agree that New Zealand has a major
problem with our very high rates of family and sexual
violence and suicides at all ages.
So why are we making such a mess of preventing this from
happening? We are after only, after all,
only a country of five million.
How come we're missing it?That is why I ask for
urgency in my petition. We have lost far too much time
in talking and writing reports and taken no action to
stop the next baby from being kicked to death.
I want to point out before I go any further
that the police, I think, get 20% reported of all
crime. Is it 20% still? Roughly. I
work in the 80%,
so I see everything that the police don't see and don't hear, and so my
comments are from the people that don't get
reported, the people that come to Pam and
I. This is what must happen in my opinion.
Number one, have the courage to recognize suicides that are
linked to family and sexual violence, and add those deaths to the
direct deaths from the violence of family and sexual
violence. There are some countries already doing this, including a
couple of states in Australia. So far, no family violence
minister here has had any appetite to do this.
The numbers would leap from an average of 30 deaths a year to over
330 because of suicides. That would make
it a major crime, and this family and sexual
violence needs to be treated as a major crime.
Recognition of cause needs to happen along with the recognition of the people
who thought the only solution was to take their own lives.
The country needs a real shakeup when a nine-year-old boy takes
his... That was last
week. I have read
the three years' annual reports of the Centre for the Prevention of Family and
Sexual Violence, or Te Puni Whenua as its previous
name. To me, each successive year, and keep in mind
I ran a business and I had to do my accounts,
each successive year is a schoolboy's cut-and-paste job of the year
before. Over those three years, they have received
$63,461,000 from the Ministry
of Justice. Nowhere in those three-year reports will
you find any wording that shows any result of how
that $63 million was spent. The fact
that... They also didn't
provide a financial statement for those three years, I find
disgraceful, and the OAG needs to look at how
$63 million of taxpayer money
can be allowed to disappear with now- no accountability
whatsoever. Ten years on, Bill English must cry
in his wine from what could have been to what actually is
today.
There has been no prevention.
The simple test for asking about prevention
is ask them
any street in New Zealand where prevention theories
have worked, that they have initiative and have had
effect.
To me, $100 million gone, a staff of
75, not a dickey boot of prevention, and no one
saved. We keep talking about what's happening in the
deaths. I worry about
why we even bother here.
Three, I suggest that each of you witness the work of the
ISR and SEN table. Watch how each member of every
agency there contributes to the case being heard, and how each one
of them is logged into their agency's database, and those experts
in their field work to find the best solution for that particular
case. That is the correct use of confidential and personal
information. None of them share it for e- each
other, and I worry that this whole idea of Project Whetu
is a disaster waiting to happen, particularly as the information
is going to be available to people who are not experts in their
field. The data, in fact, is actually quite useless for
prevention, because cases and statistics are
irrelevant when talking with individuals on how you're going to
improve their life. Prevention is creating what will
be. Th- there is no place for what
was. Four, the all-of-government approach that
JVBU first began has struggled for far too
long for most to now realize that it's not going to be a success.
What proved to be a success is the all-of-community approach
where... We very much miss the services of Chester
Borrows, the National MP from 2005 to
2017,
who understood this princi- principle perfectly by
being able to recognize what government resources would be of use at
any time in any community. His philosophy was
simple: help them only with what is needed, don't
bury them with what is not. And that is at the very crux of
why there is no direction today. The very opposite should be
happening. To me, a very small team in Wellington,
even just half a dozen, doing the Chester Borrows work, and
having the team first out in the field doing the
work. The working communities there is a guide in
establishing stages only. The sooner the community has its own
leadership group, the better. They know their community and people
better than anyone else. Five, I was
told by a member of Te Aorerekura that a million dollars goes nowhere in
this business. I'll repeat my offer to you that I made to
previous family violence ministers: give me the million
dollars, and I will change a region in New Zealand within five
years. Let me show you what can be done when a community takes
pride in itself and accepts the challenge to collectively
work to prevent family and sexual violence, and give our young
people choices that are other than suicide.
Look at what we achieved in Huntly in 2014 with
a 30% drop recorded over the six-month period
from December 2014 to May 2015....
which encouraged (foreign language) to ask for help to do exactly the
same. People are hurting out there, and it is
only common sense to talk with those who are struggling and finding them
solutions. Here is a dile- dilemma for you all, if you
will.
Have you got the courage to give me the five- the $1 million to go and
help Northland, or are you going to have more courage to tell Northland that
you won't fund them to prevent family and sexual violence?
Because that's what it comes down to.
And that is a region,
at a certain time last year, that had the highest infanticide rate
per capita in the world,
even in this room.
Six,
today you are considering New Zealand's most common crime.
In the time I have been speaking, the police have received three calls
because of it.
One in three women are a victim of it.
One in six boys under 16 are a victim of it.
Babies are victims and so are the elderly, so
those in care and those in prisons, the wealthy, the
poor, the gay, the straight, the homed, and the
homeless, even the people in this room.
There is absolutely no boundaries,
and you made the choice not to hear their voices.
Had you accepted submissions from the many groups who work with these
people, you would have collected the widest range of preventive
measures that hugely reduce the rates of family and sexual
violence that this country has ever seen.
By not allowing other submissions, you added to the silence that
allows this violence to grow. Why did you shut that
door? Why?
Seven,
lastly, I can s- please... can I please ask you, in
whatever decisions you make from today, that you remember the
children. They are considered too late, too
often, if not forgotten altogether.
Can I illustrate it (clears throat) this way?
This year began badly. On the 1st of January, a
policewoman was run over and killed in Nelson.
Later that same day, a child was beaten and stabbed to death in
Hamilton. Hands up those who remember the death of the
policewoman? Now hands up those who remember the
child? Why do we forget the
children? As far as I'm concerned, I've seen no
effect of the center out there at all
in the people that I work with around New Zealand.
I learned a life lesson while doing some work in
(foreign language) from a 10-year-old boy.
The children were discussing their new program with parents saying what they
could and couldn't do. Frustrated, little Riri
said, "Adults need to listen louder."
Have you been listening loud enough to me?
I had a daughter.
(cries) I don't want you to lose yours.
How hard are you going to push to prevent the next
Helen from being murdered? Do you have any
questions?
Well, thank you, Mr. White, and, um, it's obviously difficult to
deliver, so I appreciate you coming here.
Um, we don't have a lot of time, but I'm going to ask Mr.
Rutherford.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. White. Thank you for your advocacy in making the effort
to come and see us today as well. Um, one of the things that you
note in your petition is that we as a
country are really good at writing reports and
holding meetings. These are words that you've used.
But they never get followed through enough.
Most get briefly read and justifiably forgotten.
You've given the example of a million dollars and a five-year result, say
in Northland. Could you talk us through what you would do in
that five years with that million dollars that you referenced?
'Cause it would be great to hear what you could achieve on the ground with
something like that.
Well, if you look at what we did in Huntly and what was done in Ohakune and other
places, the very first step that was done s- was
to go to the community and ask
them. And I mean you knock on every door.
Um, it was a process that was done in Mowera 40 years ago.
You ask the families two simple questions: "What can we do
to change your life in this community to make it better?" And, "What are
your skills to help do it?" Because we found
people who'd shifted to Ohakune that was a midwife and they didn't have
a midwife, because her husband had gone there for an engineering
job. We found people
that had a, a myriad of ideas and successes.
We had, um, a guy who worked at NASA who'd retired in
Ohakune and he brought all of NASA's computers into Ohakune for the kids
'cause they didn't have any. Ask people what they contribute, but
th- most importantly when you talk to a family in their house and
say, "What can we do to make your life better in this particular town?"
they will tell you. And the glory of it is that if you're sitting in a Maori
family, you are getting everything of it from a Maori point of
view. If you're talking in a Chinese family, you get those perspective of
what is important culturally to them, and you add that into what you
do. And, uh, and when we did Ohakune, um, when
they put all those questionnaires back together and they sat down,
they put it all into what they called their scoping report, which allowed the
group of locals who were able then to
decide how they were going to go about what they were doing, and they ended up with
five headings to make it easier to work with.
And you'll guess the five: housing, health, education,
employment, and social issues....
and they set their targets, and they set a five-year period and they achieved a
lot. And to me, the most remarkable one was
the, the pass rate at the school where they had a 50%
failure rate at NZ, you know, the level two.
Mm-hmm.
That went up to 92.9 in four years
because people finally understood what their kids could do
and what their life would be if they had level two
without... The social side is getting people together and, and
there's a whole myriad of, of projects they did.
Um,
last, um, last year they brought in a new one in the
competition, um, and they brought Euchre into it.
How many people here play Euchre?
I played.
Yeah. So you had to teach a whole town how to play Euchre, which meant-
(laughs)
... you had to get people sitting down talking that never before sat down
and talked together, and that is the crux of it.
You have to have communication and you have to have the local people
talking so that you can solve problems.
Remarkably, Ohakune family and sexual
violence wasn't one of the 32 f- first projects,
but they reduced it by 40%-
Mm-hmm.
... because they got rid of the problems.
Okay, I've got last question from, uh, Ms. White.
Thank you, um, thank you for coming and talking through this.
I'm not usually on this committee, but I have this portfolio for
Labor. Um, I want to ask you about the
suicide rates and the connection, and why you think
it would make a big difference if we adopted a policy
of taking into account and investigating those
suicides.
Well, uh,
at the moment, our family violence
deaths, murders, sit around the 30.
If you talk to any group that work with suicidal people
and you get the analysis of what they're doing, keeping in mind we've got over 600
suicides a year, they all say at least half of
people considering suicide have been sexually
abused, or it comes from family violence.
They would.
And, and, and so you take that and put, make it into one lump sum
of, of putting those deaths together, you are forced to look at a far,
far bigger death rate than you are presently looking, and that would shift it
up into a major crime and it needs to get that attention.
And they do inquests so they're much more aware?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. White. Um, been very helpful.
Uh, we've gone probably nearly double your time, so um-
That's all right, I'm making up-
...
that's good. ... for the other submissions you didn't hear.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you very much. Now we're going to hear, uh, we're going to do a bit of a
swap. We're going to hear from the, the, um-
Sorry, Mr. Chair, just to address your criticism, it's
not that we didn't... It's this is, this is our usual process to hear from the
petitioner first before we decide what to do next.
So it's still, we're still open to...
Yeah.
That might be-
What, what may happen next.
Yeah, so sorry, I just-
Okay.
... don't want you leaving the impression...
Most committees, when they hear a petition, wouldn't open submissions immediately.
They want to hear from the petitioner first.
Well, I apologize because-
No, sorry, it's fine.
... I actually asked this committee
at a point, "Why aren't there other submissions?" And I was told,
"Because they've decided not to."
Well, at this stage, at this stage they've not.
At this stage.
Yeah, at this stage. So, yeah.
Okay, so-
Hopeful.
So that was... Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Right, let's have the, um, center back out, thanks.
Thank you, Mr., uh,
White.
Anybody
???
Insistent.
All right, yes, please.
Uh, thank you, Chair and, uh, committee members again for the opportunity for us
to talk in this, and, uh, thank you, Mr. White.
I'd like to start by acknowledging Mr.
White's tireless advocacy for improvements to the family violence
system. We are, we are always better in for efforts of
people like Mr. White and dependent on them.
I acknowledge the tragic loss
of your daughter, Eloise, and I thank, I thank
Mr. White for generously sharing his experiences in order to make
change and prevent family violence in our communities.
I'll ask Emma to respond to Mr. White's petition,
uh, in a more detailed way.
Emma?
Um, thank you, Andrew, and thanks to the chair and the committee for the
chance to both be here present to hear Mr.
White, um, and to have that opportunity to respond.
Um, I was fortunate enough actually to travel to David's home
earlier this year in March and hear firsthand his
frustrations, um, and ideas for the future, um, and really,
really welcomed those. Um, and I just wanted to continue to extend
that outreach and opportunity to continue the dialogue beyond
today. Um, Mr. White
raises some really critical and fundamental issues for which we
wholeheartedly agree. Um, we would all hope for and wish for
faster, more urgent progress, and in particular, a greater
focus on primary prevention. Mr. White talks
of, uh, community mobilization on a scale and level
which, uh, you know, really aims to, uh,
improve and uphold protective factors and cohesion in our
communities, which done well and together, uh, seeks to
disarm and, uh, eradicate violence.
Um, we do have several primary prevention and
prevention programs, uh, that a range of different agencies
fund and deliver. E Tū Whānau, Pasifika Proud, we've
had the It's Not OK campaign, um, although I know that that
has probably not been as prevalent and, and, and felt by New
Zealanders in the last sort of few years.
Um-We, too, agree and is does
(clicks tongue) Te Aorerekura sets out the need for
strengths-based, um, approaches and community mobilization.
Those are the two key shifts, uh, in Te Aorerekura that speaks to
that. Uh, what, what we can commit to is
ensuring that we are promoting much more community-led
responses, um, and supports, um, in how we seek to enable that
through sort of community grants and support.
Um, the issue of, uh, suicides,
uh, and the drivers of suicide being really closely
connected to all forms of trauma, um, including sexual violence and
family violence, um, are, are really important.
Um, the most recent Family Violence Death Review Committee, Mortality
Review Committee into femicide certainly started to make those links
between maternal mental health, um, and, and
suicide. And as the center, we are continuing to commit
to work in partnership with the Mortality Review Committee and HQSC
and other, um, places to start to look at what can be done to
understand the connection and greater visibility, um, of, of
suicide, um, linked to family violence.
Uh, we do know for some of those, uh, young mothers, um,
that, uh, for about 60% of them, family violence was part
of that, that history. So, um, Mr. White is absolutely
right in, in raising that with the committee.
Um, I'm choosing not to sit here and defend the center
necessarily, in terms of, um, our value.
I think one of the challenges we've always had is understanding the role which
we play, which is often one of enablement as opposed
to, uh, direct doing in community.
Um, our role needs to continue to work with urgency to
ensure that what we do translates into
actionable traction and change on the ground and
impact to victims, whānau, um, and
community. Um, I'll leave it there.
I just, really grateful for the opportunity and, um, whilst I'm not looking at you,
David, um, (laughs) I'm greatly, I'm, I'm hugely thankful for your,
um, courage and commitment, um, and your, your continued
advocacy. Um, and I'm sorry we haven't done
more and faster.
Right. I've got a couple of questions, uh, probably th- three.
Uh, Mr. Radford?
Yeah. Thank, thank you, Emma. Why is family and sexual violence so prevalent in
New Zealand?
(laughs) Right. (laughs)
there are a range of historical and current state
issues that really combine to create, um, violence in this
country. Um, uh-
I think one of your colleagues, sorry, has a, something behind you.
Oh, thank you. Um, in terms of the things that
drive, um, and risk factors for, uh, family
violence, um, and sexual violence, um, there are a range of things.
And I think that's why it's often quite challenging to, just to point to the one
thing to, to solve for. Um, harmful drug and alcohol use,
um, and, uh, untreated, uh, mental health, uh, challenges
are definitely one of those. Institutional and systemic
bias, racism, ageism, sexism, uh,
misogyny, uh, colonization, a whole range of
systemic long-term entrenched factors that create the
conditions for violence to thrive.
Um, poor system responses. Quite often the system
can, can harm, um, and create harm just as a
perpetrator might create harm
not having the right social and economic supports, um, available to
people to live well and thriving lives.
Um, and also a lack of supports for people, carers, whānau and vulnerable
people. So, those are the things that our strategy sets out as the
major drivers of violence. Um,
inter- you know, they are intergenerational, they are, uh,
systemic by their very nature and therefore require a, an
effort on all fronts.
Okay, thank you.
Right. Uh, Mr. Sanderson?
Thank you. Um,
uh, Mr. White, in addition to presenting to us (crosstalk) has given us a really
excellent-
Yeah.
Yeah. ... written submission as well. I'm sure you've seen access to that.
We've received that, yeah.
And I think, um, look, I think we talked much earlier in our review
about coordination, um, and hopefully he, one of his other ideas which
he actually references a social investment agency-
Yes. Yeah.
... which you are working with. So maybe again that will give him some comfort.
But what, another idea which I think seems like a very simple one is,
um, Life Education Trust.
Mm-hmm.
So again, uh, he very much focused on prevention, which I think obviously
super important. Um, yeah. Is there, are you working, I
suppose, almost at that school and, and early education level to
try and, yeah, get some of these, um, themes
into, yeah-
Yeah.
... our young people?
Y- yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And I think when we start to talk about prevention and
primary prevention more universally, it needs to show up in all
of those settings, um, in different places.
So education settings, a- absolutely.
Um,
one of the things that we are doing to b- to bring visibility...
So we talked earlier today about a baseline review into the direct spend
around family violence and sexual violence in all of those services.
One of the next phases of that is to look at all of those
indirect supports, services, initiatives
that are exactly like Life Education Trust, exactly like other
broader parenting programs and supports maternal mental health, et cetera,
to start to get a picture of those other, um, what we call
indirect spend, but that, those other supports in communities and that government
is, is funding to try to get a much broader picture about how could
we help to orientate those toward violence prevention by their very
nature? Um, there are several, uh, early
education, uh, you know, supports and programs certainly in
terms of, uh, child protection training and support there.
There are, um, in pockets, programs around sexual, um, abuse
prevention as well. Again, some of these are not widely
scaled across the country, but there are places where it is dedicated to young
people.
Okay. Good questions.
Thank you. So with the new, um, Family Violence Sexual Violence
Ministerial Advisory Group-
Mm-hmm.
... do you think that this is something that, um, you would see them looking
into?
So, um, urgently establishing a nationwide family violence and
sexual violence prevention program and, uh-...
include death by suicide when linked to family violence in official
stats. Is that something you see as could be part of their work plan?
Um, it, it could be. Um, uh, that group is a
ministerial advisory group.
So is appointed and reports through direct to the minister.
Um, the center will, uh, be the secretariat support and
provide support and guidance to that.
So, I think that's a really good, um, forum to potentially
take this. I think having, um, particularly today, Andrew
and I being part of this process-
Mm-hmm.
... is something for us to take back to the rest of the IEB and board, in
particular the two issues raised through the petition around the Adaptive
Prevention Programme and, uh, the, the suicide connection with family
violence and sexual violence as a matter of absolute course, um,
immediately. Um, but that certainly could be something that future
advisors look at.
Um, I, I'm going to ask a question. Um, if we distill down
Mr. White's petition, it has two key legs.
First one is to focus on prevention.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, I think there may be some confusion about
your role as a enabler, uh, as opposed
to someone who
is an agency that delivers, because that's spread across
everywhere, and it's probably a lack of transparency.
So you talked, uh, Ms. Kielbreht, about the figure north of 700
million. So I think having that visibility around the prevention and the
effectiveness of that is really crucial because I
think that may or may not address Mr.
White's issue around there's not sufficient investment in that
prevention. That's the first point.
The second point you raised was around, uh, the statistics,
the accounting for suicides and why we don't
reflect, um, those, a lot of the
suicides that are related to sexual
violence and family violence. So, we haven't addressed that bit and I'm quite
keen just to hear your reflections on that.
Yeah. Um, I think as we set out in our submission that
there's currently no centrally recorded place for that
information. Um, and
however, that all family homicides are re-
reviewed by the Mortality Review Committee.
And that would be an important way in for us to start to think about
that. Um, that again, um,
is one route in. It is not that it wouldn't give you the whole
picture. I think we would need to take a concerted joint
effort to say that was something we were going to do and set up the
right information-gathering, um, approaches and data
collation to help us with that. Um,
a- as I say, I think, a- and as Mr. White has set out, there are some models,
particularly in Australia, um, Western Australia, I think, um, already
start to do this, um, and have a- and able to sort of show that.
So there are models that we could learn from.
So I, I would think that the committee will come to a
view, and obviously we're gonna have a discussion, but I think the committee
would urge you to look at it, and it h-
it dovetails into what the Minister of Mental Health is doing
because obviously there is a consequence to some of th- what happens in
that process. There's obviously other, um, arrangements.
So
actually having
a wider perspective on it, and again, as an
agency, you may or may not be the right agency, but at
least maybe the question should be if you're n-
if you are the right agency, how you can facilitate
greater access to greater data on that.
And if you aren't the right agency-
Mm-hmm.
... where you think that best be handled.
And I think I would urge you to contemplate those two issues.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. I'm going to bring this to a close.
I th- again, I just wanted to acknowledge, uh, Mr.
White, um, for his contribution. Also, to you
two and your, um, department for responding
immediately. It's not always easy with the petitioner in the room, but I
think that o- makes for open democracy and then actually
it's quite good to see some accountability.
So thank you again everyone, everyone in the room, I just want to
acknowledge you on a quite a difficult topic, um, and
unfortunately something that's, um, a nasty secret of New
Zealand. And, uh, the more we bring it to light and the more we bring about
policies that deal with it, uh, we should all encourage that and bring
it into the light. Thank you very much.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you.
(?)
Just quickly, ??????.
Yeah, I'm gonna... Sorry, I'm gonna ask you to move because I've got, we've got the
auditor general we've gotta have a little session with, so we're gonna go into
private.
I'll second.
So thank you. Thank you, everyone. Thanks, everyone.
Thank you.